---
title: A Bird&#039;s Eye View of NCBI GEO Database - II
tags:
- GEO
categories:
- rnaseq
---
We presented the structure of NCBI GEO database in our earlier commentary - [A
Bird's Eye View of NCBI GEO Database](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2011/08/03/a
-birds-eye-view-of-ncbi-geo-database/). Today we will inspect the contents of
GEO database more closely.
<!--more-->

As we explained earlier, GEO data sets are organized in terms of both GPLs
(platforms/array design) and GSEs (collection of many measurements on one or
more array designs). As an example, GPL570 is the human gene array designed by
Affymetrix. At NCBI GEO database, all experiments using the above array can be
downloaded together from their GPL570 link. On the other hand, a GSE ID
typically represents all data from a researcher related to a publication. That
GSE file may include any number of platforms (GPLs) depending on how the
experiment was designed.

In the following chart, we show the most popular GPLs, i.e. the ones used by
the highest number of GSEs. Please click on the chart to see it in a larger
form. GPL570 is clearly the winner closely followed by GPL1261 (Affymetrix
mouse array). Each of those arrays was used by over 1,000 publications. GEO
also assigned single GPL IDs for all Illumina short read submissions for each
organism. Those sets (GPL9052, GPL9058, etc.) are catching up fast given their
limited history.

![](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2011/08/Capture22-300x240.png)

Data in the above chart is from April, but on our website, we added a [new
place](http://homolog.us/CI/index.php/charts) to continue to show these charts
with the latest data. You can get there by clicking on the 'Trends' link at
the top of our page. In the coming days, we will add many other trend charts
for data in GEO and SRA databases.

![](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2011/08/Capture4.png)

We wanted to also find out the historical trend in use of the popular GPLs.
You can [click here](http://homolog.us/CI/index.php/charts/gpls) to access the
charts, or go to the trends section and check the second link. You will find
that GPL570 and GPL1261 are gaining strength over the years, whereas older
arrays such as GPL96 and GPL81 were used mostly in the earlier years. GPL6629
(Affymetrix fly tiling array) is interesting, because it reached top place in
usage even with three years of history. 2011 data in all charts are from
April. We will rectify that this week by loading the most recent data, and
then continue to update almost daily.

If you are interested in checking usage of your favorite GPL that is not
included above, please click the 'search' button on our top menu and type the
GPL ID you are interested in. For example, you can type GPL9052 to find the
trend in NGS sequencing using Illumina technology for human transcriptome.

