---
title: Do not Go for a Swim after Having an Ice Cream
tags:
- introductory
categories:
- blog
---
A [new study](http://irishliberty.wordpress.com/2009/10/09/more-on-inequality-
and-misuse-of-statistics/) observed amazing correlation between ice cream
consumption and drowning death. It is very likely that commercialized ice
cream makers add harmful chemicals that interfere with human motor skills, or
do they?
<!--more-->

![](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2011/11/ice-cream-vs-
drowning-300x213.jpg)

Everyday we are bombarded with information from 'new medical studies'.
Ordinary reporters present those stories in the most sensationalized manner,
but intelligent readers need to do their due diligence before accepting the
reported conclusions. Does drinking wine increase life expectancy? Is it
unsafe to use cellphone, while driving? Do people eating organic food stay
healthier? Some of the reported studies may have found 'cause and effect'
relationship, but in other cases, we are observing the effect of a third
variable. On hot days, more people have ice cream and more people like to go
for a swim increasing number of drowning deaths. On cold days, very few people
like to have ice cream or go for a swim. So, the above correlation shows
effect of a third variable - weather.

Scientists are generally aware of 'correlation is not causation' principle in
their own research, but when it comes to fields outside their own expertise,
they take biased opinions of hacks at face value. Paul Krugman shouts at the
top of his voice that WW II ended great depression, and therefore we need to
start a war ([a fake one with aliens, if no worthy opponent is
found](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/08/15/paul-krugman-fake-alien-
invasion_n_926995.html)) to solve the current economic crisis. Did WW II
really end great depression? Data shows that two events happened at the same
time, but why ignore the presence of a third variable - social mood?

