---
title: Highlights - 7&#47;30&#47;2011
tags:
- introductory
categories:
- blog
---
In the highlights section, I plan to add papers and news that I feel compelled
to bookmark. When I manage to read those same papers or try out their
algorithms, there will be a longer post. Please feel free to suggest any
interesting link for our highlights section. Even an interesting blog post or
Seqanswers thread will be good for us.
<!--more-->

1\. [BGI plans to offer bioinformatics cloud
service](http://www.nature.com/news/2011/110727/full/475435a.html)

"_The world's largest DNA-sequencing outfit is looking to the clouds. The BGI
(formerly the Beijing Genomics Institute) this month announced plans to roll
out its cloud computing capabilities, which it hopes will help it to dominate
bioinformatics in the same way it does the world of sequencing._"

This is an impressive move by BGI. The day I started to use Amazon cloud, I
felt there would be a need for cloud service customized for bioinformatics
applications.

2\. [Extensive genomic and transcriptional diversity identified through
massively parallel DNA and RNA sequencing of eighteen Korean
individuals](http://www.nature.com/ng/journal/v43/n8/full/ng.872.html)

I am more interested in this paper to check their bioinformatics approaches
than the actual results.

3\. [Principal component analysis-based filtering improves detection for
Affymetrix gene expression
arrays](http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/content/39/13/e86.abstract)

4\. [Sequence-specific error profile of Illumina
sequencers](http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/content/39/13/e90.abstract)

_"We identified the sequence-specific starting positions of consecutive
miscalls in the mapping of reads obtained from the Illumina Genome Analyser
(GA).....The two major sequence patterns that trigger this sequence-specific
error (SSE) are: (i) inverted repeats and (ii) GGC sequences."_

5\. [Comparative studies of de novo assembly tools for next-generation
sequencing technologies](http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/content/27/1
5/2031.abstract)

\---------------------

Yesterday we were in the Olympic national park and watched the beauty of
nature expressed in many fascinating ways. One example that especially caught
my eye was a giant tree growing on top of another deceased giant tree -

![](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2011/07/IMG_2564-224x300.jpg)

