---
title: HOTAIR - a cancer lincRNA
categories:
- ncRNA
---
We start with HOTAIR, because it was discovered by one of our [ex-
collaborators](http://www.rinnlab.com/) and, even more importantly, he chose a
name that we like [see below].
<!--more-->

HOTAIR is a long intergenic noncoding RNA (lincRNA). The name HOTAIR stands
for 'HOX antisense intergenic RNA', [or does it
really?](http://www.bidmc.org/News/InResearch/2009/October/Brilliant10.aspx)

From the article linked above:

_As Popular Science notes, "[Rinn] silenced his critics in 2007 when he showed
that one of the [lincRNA molecules] serves a vital function in human cells. He
dubbed it HOTAIR, a wry nod to the fact that so many scientists thought his
field of research was full of it. The molecule delivers proteins to a crucial
cluster of genes and helps regulate immune response, cancer growth and fat-
and stem-cell production, among other things."_

**Biological Role**

![](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/ncrna/wp-content/uploads/sites/3/2011/10
/lincRNA-300x178.png)

HOTAIR interacts with chromatin remodeling complexes to help them target
specific genes or genomic regions. HOTAIR is found to repress genes in HOXD
complex. Regarding its specific functionality, so far it appears that HOTAIR
likely acts as a bridge or scaffold to bring two protein complexes together,
namely Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) and histone demethylase LSD1.

HOTAIR is the first lincRNA found to be trans-acting. What does that mean? It
implies that HOTAIR is located in one chromosome (chromosome 12 of human
genome) and works on a different chromosome (chromosome 2). Suz-Twelve protein
carries HOTAIR from chromosome 12 to chromosome 2.

HOTAIR is an oncogenic lincRNA and has been linked with breast cancer
metastasis.

**Chain of key discoveries**

Tiling array map of chromosome 22

In 2003, John Rinn and his colleagues at Yale published a tiling-array study
of a human chromosome - _[The transcriptional activity of human Chromosome
22_](http://genesdev.cshlp.org/content/17/4/529.long). It was not the first
tiling array map of chromosome 22, because a group from Affy
[published](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/296/5569/916.full) a similar map
few months earlier. However, Rinn's approach had few strengths that helped him
in later experiments. He used maskless array synthesizer technology later
commercialized by Nimblegen. With maskless array synthesizer, the cost of
redesigning arrays is minimal. So, one can make an array of any region of
chromosome he wishes with any density, and pop comes out an array from the
machine. The cost of designing the mask was prohibitive for Affymetrix.

Tiling array map of entire human genome

In 2004, a collaborative team of scientists from Yale and NASA Ames (including
one of us) published similar map of the entire human genome - _[Global
Identification of Human Transcribed Sequences with Genome Tiling
Arrays_](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/306/5705/2242.short). For a free
copy of the article, [check
here](http://homepage.mac.com/jrinn/Bertone%20et%20al.pdf). Using maskless
array technology was the main reason for this team to perform the experiment
so rapidly.

Dense tiling array map of human Hox cluster

John Rinn moved to Stanford to work with Howard Chang and designed another
highly dense maskless array (5 nucleotide resolution) to check the Hox
cluster. The result was fascinating. They found 231 ncRNAs and one of them
named HOTAIR was found to be involved in gene silencing at a distance. Their
study was published in Cell - _[Functional Demarcation of Active and Silent
Chromatin Domains in Human HOX Loci by Noncoding
RNAs_](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0092867407006599).

Link with cancer

Chang lab continued to work on HOTAIR. In 2010, they published two interesting
studies. In the first paper - _[Long noncoding RNA HOTAIR reprograms chromatin
state to promote cancer metastasis_](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC3049919/?tool=pmcentrez) \- they linked HOTAIR with cancer metastasis.

In the second paper, they reported that HOTAIR interacts with histone
modification complex LSD1 - _[Long Noncoding RNA as Modular Scaffold of
Histone Modification Complexes_](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3
049919/?tool=pmcentrez)

**Useful information and links**

Location

Chr12

Size

6,232 nt on chromosome, 2.2 Kbp exons.

Sequence

[Link](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NR_003716)

Function

Silencing - control transcription of chr 2

Bridging of PRC2 and LSD1 complexes

Wiki

[Link](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HOTAIR)

