---
title: Highlights - 7&#47;25&#47;2011
tags:
- introductory
- Other
categories:
- blog
---
Each day, we will present a short summary of interesting papers. Some of these
will be considered in further detail later, when time permits. Please feel
free to suggest any good paper you come across.
<!--more-->

[Trinity - Full-length transcriptome assembly from RNA-Seq data without a
reference genome](http://www.nature.com/nbt/journal/v29/n7/full/nbt.1883.html)
This is an excellent [Category D algorithm](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/) that
we have been using for the last few months for our RNAseq with very
satisfactory result. The manuscript just came out in the paper version of
Nature Biotech, but electronic version was available from their website for a
few months. Previously we had been struggling with Velvet+Oases, which
consumed large amount of memory. The memory handling of Trinity is excellent.

[Stampy: A statistical algorithm for sensitive and fast mapping of Illumina
sequence
reads](http://genome.cshlp.org/content/early/2010/10/25/gr.111120.110) This
paper came out online last year, but we are starting to use their method. Most
[category A algorithms](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/?p=109) (mapping on
reference genome) sacrifice speed for accuracy. Bowtie and BWA cannot go
beyond more than few mismatches. Stampy is designed to overcome that
shortcoming.

[Dindel: Accurate indel calls from short-read data
](http://genome.cshlp.org/content/21/6/961.abstract) This is another category
A algorithm directed towards finding insertion-deletions from short read data.
Earlier algorithms searched for exact matches and short SNPs.

\----------

Yesterday was one of the most beautiful days of summer here and we decided to
make a trip to Sunrise, Mount Rainier to get a close view of the peak. We
walked on snow on a nearby hill (Wonderland trail, I believe) and enjoyed full
view of the mountain. Hope this picture will bring some needed chill for east-
coasters.

![](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2011/07/IMG_2534-300x224.jpg)

