---
title: What Does BTW Stand for?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
BTW ='by the way' for the texting generation, but you did not come here for
something so obvious, right?
<!--more-->

Older physicists and mathematicians use the acronym to refer to a pair of
fascinating papers from 1987
([here](http://chaos.swarthmore.edu/courses/Physics120_2008/docs/btw.pdf) and
[here)](http://prl.aps.org/abstract/PRL/v59/i4/p381_1). They were written by
Danish physicist Per Bak, and his colleagues Chao Tang and Kurt Wiesenfeld.

They were definitely among the most important papers I read in my life,
because they showed how complex behavior can be obtained from simple
mathematical models. Per Bak later wrote a [popular physics
book](http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/4/4/reviews/bak.html) to explain the
significance of his discovery.

![](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/bak.jpg)

The best way to understand the model is to close all papers and books, and
[try the toy model yourself](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bak%E2%80%93Tang%E2%
80%93Wiesenfeld_sandpile). Forget everything about sand, etc. You are
essentially simulating a mathematical equation in cellular automata (i.e.
digital) form.

![](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2012/09/Capture4-300x187.png)

Even for those with mathematical background, it may take weeks to grasp the
significance of the discovery. If you understand it too quickly, maybe you do
not get it.

Why do we bring it up here? Biologists are trying to describe nature, but
'describing nature' essentially means fitting observations into known
mathematical models. We hope increasing the toolbox of mathematical models
will enhance the ability of researchers to describe many observations not
fitting linear models.

Speaking of simple mathematical models, another book that blew our mind was
Stephen Wolfram's '[A New Kind of
Science](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_New_Kind_of_Science)' (NKoS). The book
got criticized, because Wolfram compared his book to be as significant as
Newton's Principia Mathematica. We thought his claims were accurate, but they
seemed to have threatened many mediocre scientists.

Recent comments from Wolfram on NKoS -

[Living a Paradigm Shift: Looking Back on Reactions to A New Kind of Science

[Its Been 10 Years: Whats Happened with A New Kind of
Science?](http://blog.stephenwolfram.com/2012/05/its-been-10-years-whats-
happened-with-a-new-kind-of-science/)

[Looking to the Future of A New Kind of
Science](http://blog.stephenwolfram.com/2012/05/looking-to-the-future-of-a
-new-kind-of-science/)

One interesting aspect of BTW and NKoS is that the models can be easily taught
to young kids, even though the implications of the models go far deeper. A
child born today will turn 30 in year 2042, but the mathematics we teach them
is from 1842, if not before. How will they appreciate complexity of nature, if
they are not introduced to the concepts at an early age?

