---
title: On Discovery of 'God Particle'
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
It has been a while since I worked actively on theoretical physics. Without
quantum mechanics, human society could not have developed much understanding
of DNA/proteins, or built computers with semiconductor chips to analyze them.
Yet, the world of quantum physics is a mystery to most non-practitioners. Some
of them read few popular books ('[In Search of Schrodinger's
Cat](http://www.amazon.com/Search-Schrodingers-Cat-John-
Gribbin/dp/0552125555)') and come out more confused than before.
<!--more-->

Is it their fault? Not really, because even Einstein could not accept quantum
mechanics at full face value. Is electron a particle or wave? How can matter
and antimatter (electron and positron) merge and annihilate themselves?
Answers to those questions do not make sense with conventional understanding
of the physical world.

Although my Masters and Ph.D. thesis needed deep understanding of quantum
mechanics, I was too impatient to take classes at the physics department and
get bored for an entire semester. So, other than two classes on mathematical
physics, I mostly learned the subject by myself with occasional help from my
supervisor. I remember that quantum mechanics was very hard subject, when I
first started studying it. I used to read books in the library for hours
without figuring out what was going on. The mathematical part was easy, but
the conceptual part was not so easy.

Then everything became clear one day !!

One fine morning, I realized that electron, proton, positron, neutrino, broken
symmatry, Fermi level, etc. all are mathematical concepts. Mathematics is one
and only truth in physics, whereas the interpretations are fantasies created
by various physicists for having good times in the bar. From that point
onward, understanding physics paper became really easy. I dug straight to the
underlying equation and tried to understand it. Then I tried to create my own
interpretation, and only after that, looked at what the authors of the papers
made up as their interpretations. In my world, electrons, positrons, etc. are
all parameters of various equations. So, annihilation of matter and anti-
matter is the simple. Two mathematical terms with opposite signs cancel each
other. The pairing of two electrons (electron and hole) as Cooper pair is also
simple, as long as I understand the mathematical construct.

Getting back to 'God particle', today I read [in the
news](http://www.usatoday.com/tech/science/story/2012-07-02/god-particle-
evidence-cern/55981840/1) \-

> Scientists believe the "God particle" that might explain the underpinnings
of the universe is real, and they are about to present their evidence to the
world.

...

Researchers at the European Organization for Nuclear Research, or CERN, say
that they have compiled vast amounts of data that show the footprint and
shadow of the particle all but proving it exists, even though it has never
actually been glimpsed.

Here is what the article says, in my language.

The physicists had a mathematical theory of the ultra-small world, and one
parameter of the mathematical theory was named 'Higgs boson'. The best
evidence of the theory to be correct was to see a peak at certain place in an
NMR-like experiment. If the peak was not seen, there could be two
possibilities - (i) the mathematical theory itself was wrong, (ii) the NMR
machine was not strong enough.

Experimental physicists pursued option (ii) and were building larger and
larger NMR-like machines.

![](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2012/07
/Construction_of_LHC_at_CERN-225x300.jpg)

**Image: Large Hadron Collider**

Finally, they see some evidence of the peak that would suggest that the
parameter in the mathematical equation was indeed correct.

From the same USA today article -

> The idea is much like gravity and Isaac Newton's discovery: It was there all
the time before Newton explained it. But now scientists know what it is and
can put that knowledge to further use.

My interpretation - only further use this discovery will have is to bring more
research funding to the particle physics researchers, who will propose to
build even bigger machines.

The physicists should stop digging deeper, and spend their energy on other
less expensive, but more interesting, topics in nature. Here is my suggestion.
Can any physicist explain, why different plants have different fractal
structures based on genetic information? For example, is it possible to turn a
pine tree structure into a [banyan tree](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Banyan)
by changing few genes? How do mathematics of fractals and genes work together?

