---
title: Bioinformatics and Computational Biology - same? Si, Si, Si.
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
At his blog, Kevin [painstakingly explained](http://kevin-
gattaca.blogspot.com/2012/08/bioinformatics-computational-biology.html) the
difference between bioinformatics and computational biology. You can
understand the difference better by reading the following history.
<!--more-->

We remember the time, when the terms 'computational biology' were coined. From
time to time, we used to visit UCSF in 2002-2004 to discuss computational
algorithms to solve biological problems. In those days, only few researchers
were using computers in biology, and even a fewer set were actually designing
algorithms.

The second group (which included us) were perfectly happy to call us
bioinformaticians, but around the same time, the field got invaded by database
and website designers. Hundreds of papers started to get submitted to
conferences with titles like - 'bioinformatics of rice ESTs', 'JOKED - Just-
another Obscure Kinetochore EST Database', etc. We sensed trouble, because in
those years, biologists did not take researchers developing computational
algorithms in the first place, and we did not like to get our contributions
diluted by data presenters. So, 'computational biology' was born. A colleague
from UCSF told us to always use 'computational biology' to describe our work
henceforth. I do not know whether he coined the term, or whether the decision
was made at a conference by like-minded researchers.

Leroy Hood probably went through the same inconvenience, because around the
same time, he started promoting the term 'systems biology' at seminars, talks
and conferences. That created more difficulty for us, because we were often
asked by confused colleagues to explain the difference between 'systems
biology', 'computational biology' and 'bioinformatics'.

The real battle was of territory. Traditional biologists were not ready to
yield ground to computational researchers, who always spoke weird language,
and could never produce short tables that could be manipulated by Excel. It
was not settled until NGS came into picture and overwhelmed even the highest
power Excel.

These days, we are happy to call ourselves bioinformaticians.

