---
title: Sequencing War and NextEra Kit
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
In the previous commentary, we presented a [nice and compact review
paper](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/08/24/a-great-review-of-various-
sequencing-instrumentstechnologies/) on various sequencing technologies with
detailed price information. For those without time should be perfectly happy
with our review summarized in the following figure, or [this 8 minute
video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sXldafIl5DQ) \-
<!--more-->

![](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2012/08/good-bad-ugly-
300x129.png)

Illumina currently has the highest backing among researchers especially after
their release of HiSeq instruments. SOLiD from ABI/Life has its own group of
followers, but they are usually affected by the delay in conversion of
programs to color space. However, Life Technologies recognized that problem.
The company made its own move by acquiring Ion Torrent and speeding up the
release of its low cost sequencer. Illumina followed with MiSeq and Roche/454
brought out its 'GS Junior' sequencer.

The above description does not mention other players like (i) Pacific Bio, who
is playing like it has 6 aces in its hands, while everyone knows that the deck
has only 4, (ii) not so agile array player Agilent, who is surviving by
turning sequencing problem into array problem, thanks to [exome
capture](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exome_sequencing), (iii) potential new
surprises from Oxford Nanopore, etc. However, the real battle is between the
three players mentioned earlier.

In the Mexican standoff, Illumina made a small and significant move last Nov
(2011) by acquiring a company named [Epicenter
Bio](http://www.epibio.com/nextera.asp). That company sold a simple and
convenient exome capture kit for researchers, and the kit worked well with all
kinds of machines including Roche/454. After acquisition, Illumina decided to
turn nasty and announced discontinuation of selling NextEra kit for Roche/454
instruments. Roche got so mad that it decided to [eat the whole
Illumina](http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-03-29/roche-raises-illumina-bid-
to-51-seeking-faster-deal.html). That did not go well, and a ['grapes are
sour'](http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-04-18/roche-drops-illumina-bid-on-
concerns-of-flawed-technology.html) story followed. So, all players are back
to the Mexican standoff position again and the pot of gold is sitting at the
center.

The above background is to present the context for explaining the significance
of NextEra kit. In a detailed [early adopter review](http://core-
genomics.blogspot.com/2012/07/illuminas-nextera-capture-is-this.html),
CoreGenomics blog presented it as a potential killer app.

The kit helps in simplifying (and reducing cost) of exome capture experiments.
These days, everyone is realizing that they cannot cheaply sequence the entire
human genome for every individual, and sequencing the coding regions is good
for many things they are interested in anyway. But how to get only the coding
regions? Exome capture methods uses microarrays to solve that problem, and
Roche's big bet on Nimblegen was potentially to promote that approach. Nextera
throws cold water by removing array from the equation, and that cuts many
processing steps to make life easy for the biologists. We will write another
commentary describing how their method works, but here are two good sources
for more information -

[Andrew Adey et al. (2010) **Rapid, low-input, low-bias construction of
shotgun fragment libraries by high-density in vitro transposition** Genome
Biol. 11(12): R119.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3046479/)

[A post at Coregenomics blog](http://core-genomics.blogspot.com/2012/07
/illuminas-nextera-capture-is-this.html)

