---
title: Cargo Cult Science
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
[Here](http://www.lhup.edu/~dsimanek/cargocul.htm) is an interesting essay on
how to do science. It is from a 1974 lecture delivered to Caltech professors
and students. I must warn you that the guy is old-fashioned and out of touch
with 'modern' practices, because doing what he said will surely get all your
papers and grants rejected.
<!--more-->

**On raising money from public -**

>

I would like to add something that's not essential to the science, but
something I kind of believe, which is that you should not fool the layman when
you're talking as a scientist. I am not trying to tell you what to do about
cheating on your wife, or fooling your girlfriend, or something like that,
when you're not trying to be a scientist, but just trying to be an ordinary
human being. We'll leave those problems up to you and your rabbi. I'm talking
about a specific, extra type of integrity that is not lying, but bending over
backwards to show how you are maybe wrong, that you ought to have when acting
as a scientist. And this is our responsibility as scientists, certainly to
other scientists, and I think to laymen.

For example, I was a little surprised when I was talking to a friend who was
going to go on the radio. He does work on cosmology and astronomy, and he
wondered how he would explain what the applications of this work were. "Well,"
I said, "there aren't any." He said, "Yes, but then we won't get support for
more research of this kind." I think that's kind of dishonest. If you're
representing yourself as a scientist, then you should explain to the layman
what you're doing--and if they don't want to support you under those
circumstances, then that's their decision.

**On writing paper -**

> If you're doing an experiment, you should report everything that you think
might make it invalid--not only what you think is right about it: other causes
that could possibly explain your results; and things you thought of that
you've eliminated by some other experiment, and how they worked--to make sure
the other fellow can tell they have been eliminated.

Details that could throw doubt on your interpretation must be given, if you
know them. You must do the best you can--if you know anything at all wrong, or
possibly wrong--to explain it. If you make a theory, for example, and
advertise it, or put it out, then you must also put down all the facts that
disagree with it, as well as those that agree with it. There is also a more
subtle problem. When you have put a lot of ideas together to make an elaborate
theory, you want to make sure, when explaining what it fits, that those things
it fits are not just the things that gave you the idea for the theory; but
that the finished theory makes something else come out right, in addition.

In summary, the idea is to try to give all of the information to help others
to judge the value of your contribution; not just the information that leads
to judgment in one particular direction or another.

**Our rebuttal to dear readers, who expected us to issue optimistic ['vision' for 21st century biology](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/08/16/our-vision-for-biology-during-21st-century/) -**

> The first principle is that you must not fool yourself--and you are the
easiest person to fool. So you have to be very careful about that. After
you've not fooled yourself, it's easy not to fool other scientists. You just
have to be honest in a conventional way after that.

There is lot more [at this link](http://www.lhup.edu/~dsimanek/cargocul.htm).

