---
title: On Global Warming
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Over the last few weeks, we were trying to learn as much about <del>global
warming</del> climate change as possible. Many biology papers mention the
impact of <del>global warming</del> climate change on bioshere, and naturally
we wanted to understand the phenomenon from the first principles.
<!--more-->

If you go past all popular-level debates and get to nitty-gritty details, you
will find that the climatologists [built very sophisticated
models](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Global_climate_model) to forecast future
temperature of earth over the next 100 years. That was very exciting. We love
complex mathematical models.

Looking further below the hood, we found that the global climate models came
in different flavors - HadSM3, HadAM3P, FAMOUS, HadRM3P, etc. At their heart,
they all simulated [Navier-Stokes
equation](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Navier%E2%80%93Stokes_equations) using
finite difference or spectral method, and simulated the relative behavior of
oceans, ice sheets, wind, radiation, humidity, etc. over a long period of
time. One thing for sure, they are very sophisticated. Did I use the word
already?

We even downloaded a [publicly available
simulator](http://edgcm.columbia.edu/) to run our own calculations. That is
where things went downhill. We will elaborate on that later, but here is a
hint. EdGCM is described [in its
manual](http://edgcm.columbia.edu/documentation/EdGCM_Manual_v3.2.pdf) in the
following manner.

![](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/eggcm-300x96.jpg)

You can see that climate science is very multidisciplinary bringing together
knowledge gathered over the decades in all domains of science. Do you find
anything missing?

Getting back to climate models, one common feature of them is the following
forecast in trend of global temperature over the next 100 years. The slope
changes between model to model, but the trend remains identical. We decided to
dig down further to understand that part of the forecast.

![](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2012/07
/Global_Warming_Predictions-300x214.png)

The above chart is from wikipedia, but it is based on a similar figure in the
IPCC report (Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change). You cannot understand the figure without looking into its caption.
So, let us reproduce the entire wikipedia figure with caption.

![](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/gcm.jpg)

Those four words 'SRES A2 emissions scenario' are the most important ones in
various global warming forecasts. What are they? They represent predicted
future economic and population growth over the next 100 years !! IPCC reports
have [six scenarios (A1FI, A1B, A1T, A2, B1, and
B2)](http://www.ipcc.ch/ipccreports/sres/emission/index.php?idp=100) for
future economic growth over the next century or so. More details on various
scenarios and their 'story-lines' can be found
[here](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special_Report_on_Emissions_Scenarios).

Let us explain how the temperature predictions from the simulators work in
more detail. The simulation starts with a forecast of future economic growth
rate, and translates it into growth rate of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
For example, the following chart shows the predicted carbon dioxide content
over the next 100 years based on A1 scenario. It is primarily a function of
economic growth rate. The data for the following figure were obtained from our
downloaded free simulator.

![](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/co2-300x253.jpg)

Based on growth rate of carbon dioxide, the models compute future temperature
trend. Replace one economic scenario with another and you have different
growth rate of carbon dioxide accumulation and different temperature trend
over the next 50 or 100 years. Do you understand what is going on? The
temperature forecasts are essentially economic forecasts over the next 100
years !!

That got us even more excited. Regular readers know that we have an
outstanding track record of forecasting economy. In 2005, [we
predicted](http://www.safehaven.com/author/154/dr-manoj-pratim-samant) crash
in housing bubble and subsequent global economic depression mimicking the
1930s. So, we decided to find the IPCC scenario that reflects our forecast. As
it turns out, IPCC scenario A1 represents rapid economic growth of 3.6% in
global GDP over the next 50 years, whereas the most pessimistic B2 represents
less rapid economic growth of 2.8% over the next 50 years. There is no
possibility of shrinking GDP anywhere. In contrast, [data on US gasoline
usage](http://globaleconomicanalysis.blogspot.com/2012/05/3-month-gasoline-
and-petroleum-usage.html) shows peak usage in 2007 and sharp decline since
then -

![](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/Wallace-Gasoline-
Usage-3-Month-Thru-April-2012-300x218.png)

[Chart is borrowed from Mish's economic blog]

Similar trend will be seen in global usage, when the economic depression goes
global.

In conclusion, we found that global climate models are essentially economic
forecasters over the next 50 or 100 years, and are created by people who do
not even know whether their countries will remain solvent next year.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/I5QwKEwo4Bc" frameborder="0"> </iframe>
