---
title: Energy - the Hidden Cost of NGS Analysis
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
With biology getting data-intensive, the costs of analyzing the data has
become larger than the costs of acquiring the data. Although scientists are
starting to recognize the significance of bioinformatic analysis, steep energy
costs for running the servers is one aspect that is rarely mentioned in
academic circles. Lack of transparency regarding power bill is one reason.
Typically, the servers at academic institutions are maintained by high-
performance computing centers, and the researchers pay for them through a bulk
charge called 'institutional overhead'.
<!--more-->

Internet companies are innovators in the respect of running large number of
servers, and they came up with many solutions to optimize energy usage.
However, there may still be large amount of waste as New York Times explained
in their article [The Cloud Factories Power, Pollution and the
Internet](http://www.nytimes.com/2012/09/23/technology/data-centers-waste-
vast-amounts-of-energy-belying-industry-image.html?_r=1):

> A yearlong examination by The New York Times has revealed that this
foundation of the information industry is sharply at odds with its image of
sleek efficiency and environmental friendliness.

Most data centers, by design, consume vast amounts of energy in an
incongruously wasteful manner, interviews and documents show. Online companies
typically run their facilities at maximum capacity around the clock, whatever
the demand. As a result, data centers can waste 90 percent or more of the
electricity they pull off the grid, The Times found.

To guard against a power failure, they further rely on banks of generators
that emit diesel exhaust. The pollution from data centers has increasingly
been cited by the authorities for violating clean air regulations, documents
show. In Silicon Valley, many data centers appear on the state governments
Toxic Air Contaminant Inventory, a roster of the areas top stationary diesel
polluters.

The claims made in the article were not liked by an industry practitioner, who
wrote [this rebuttal](http://blog.diegodoval.com/2012/09/23/a-lot-of-lead-
bullets-a-response-to-the-new-york-times-article-on-data-center-efficiency/)
\-

> As I was reading this New York Times article on data centers and power use,
there was mainly one word stretching, doppler-like through my head: Nooooooo!

Not because the article exposed some secret that everyone thats worked on
websites at scale knows and this intrepid reporter was blowing the lid on our
quasi-masonic-illuminati conspiracy. Not because there was information in it
that was in any way shocking.

The reason I was yelling in my head was that I could see, clear as day, how
people who dont know whats involved in running large scale websites would take
this article. Just look at the comments section.

The assertions made in it essentially paint our engineers and operations
people as a bunch of idiots who are putting together rows and rows of boxes on
data centers and not caring what this costs to their businesses, nay, to the
planet.

And nothing could be further from the truth.

