---
title: Part 2 - When a City is Carpet bombed, Only the Strongest Structures Survive
categories:
- ncRNA
---
Dresden is a beautiful, historic German city located near the borders of
Poland and Czech republic. During the early 20th century, Dresden came into
prominence as a major manufacturing center and communication hub. More than
commerce, the city became a leading center for science, art, theater and
classical music in Europe. It was known for its pleasant university life,
graceful architecture, splendid lakes and gardens.
<!--more-->

![](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/7e/Dresden-
Altstadt_von_der_Marienbruecke-II.jpg/300px-Dresden-
Altstadt_von_der_Marienbruecke-II.jpg)

Dresden survived mostly intact during WW II and was deemed as a safe city, so
much so that over half million refugees poured into it from other destroyed
areas. After all what strategic interest does a harmless university town have?

That illusion of safety changed on Valentine's day of 1945, when the British
and American Air forces dropped over 2700 tons of bombs to entirely destroy
the historic center of the city. The bombing was controversial, because it was
targeted specifically on the civilian areas and seemed to have killed many
Polish refugees trying to flee horrors of war in their own country. There had
been long running controversy over how many people were killed, and whether
the targeting of civilians was to be considered a war-crime.

[Source](http://poisonpage.blogspot.com/2008/10/dresden-bombings-in-second-
world-war.html)

![](http://4.bp.blogspot.com/_-7-vboSIDG8/SPw8vZHgGAI/AAAAAAAADZE/NfJbgp6oT9w/
s1600/dresden-second-world-war-allied-bombing-2.jpg)

[Kurt Vonnegut](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kurt_Vonnegut), the famous
American author, survived miraculously from the Dresden campaign. While he was
a chemistry student at Cornell, Vonnegut was enlisted by US Army and was sent
to war in the European theater. He was captured as a POW and was imprisoned at
an underground slaughterhouse meat locker in Dresden on that fateful night.
Although his underground 'bunker' saved him from the bombing, when he came
out, he saw utter destruction everywhere he looked at. The experience affected
him profoundly all his life, and he immortalized it in his classic novel
'[Slaughterhouse Five](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slaughterhouse-Five)'.

How does it relate to the biology we plan to cover here? Very little, I would
say, but I thought our dear readers would not mind a bit of historical
digression. Also, please remember the title - 'When a City is Carpet bombed,
Only the Strongest Structures Survive.' It is a good analogy for the science
we expect to cover.

In the next commentary of this series, we shall discuss **[Part 3 GC
Distribution of Genomes (Casual)](http://homolog.us/ncRNA/?p=141)**.

