---
title: Illumina Creates Phony Concerns to Derail BGI Acquisition of US Company
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Hide your wallet or run away, when a large and publicly traded US company
shows concern about 'terrorism' and 'national security'. [Borderline
psychopaths running these
multinationals](http://www.forbes.com/sites/jeffbercovici/2011/06/14/why-some-
psychopaths-make-great-ceos/) have very little respect for the lives lost in
9/11, and are ready to use public's concerns about the horrific incidence to
manipulate their opinions.
<!--more-->

Few months back, we reported about [BGI's decision to acquire Complete
Genomics](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/09/17/a-real-life-example-of-our-
forecast-for-21st-century/). Seems like Illumina is not very happy and is
pulling levers in Washington with mentions of terrorism and national security
to stop the deal. George Church explained, why Illumina's claims are bogus and
self-serving -

> A technical adviser to both Complete Genomics and BGI Shenzhen who supports
the transaction suggested that raising the specter of terrorism and exploiting
the national appetite for China-bashing is a cover for Illuminas real motive
to buy Complete and achieve market domination for itself.

They want to destabilize this field, said genetics pioneer George Church,
director of the Center on Bioenergy at Harvard & MIT and the National
Institutes of Healths Center of Excellence in Genomic Science at Harvard. They
do not want that kind of competition. If I were Illumina, I might do the same
thing. But this is a beautiful illustration of why our politicians and CEOs
should be a lot more educated about technology.

The pattern of China bashing has become a hallmark of US media. Even though
[Vioxx took away the lives of many more
Americans](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/07/05/a-triumph-of-medical-
research/) than Melanine in children's toys, the second story was given far
more importance than [far more severe issue with toxic
drugs](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/09/23/the-drugs-dont-work-and-open-
source-will-not-make-them-work/). So, we are not too hopeful that "our
politicians and CEOs will get lot more educated about technology" and start to
show sense. [Democracy does not work that way](http://www.amazon.com/Notes-
Democracy-H-L-Mencken/dp/0977378810).

