---
title: The Chinese Mailman, Who Does not Like to Walk
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Please check [Chinese Postman
Problem](http://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_postman_problem), and its
politically correct cousin - [Route Inspection
Problem](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Route_inspection_problem). They are very
important to solve graph theoretic problems in bioinformatics or elsewhere.
<!--more-->

> The Chinese postman problem is a mathematical problem of Graph theory. It is
also known as route inspection problem. Suppose there is a mailman who needs
to deliver mail to a certain neighborhood. The mailman is unwilling to walk
far, so he wants to find the shortest route through the neighborhood, that
meets the following criteria:

It is a closed circuit (it ends at the same point it starts).

He needs to go through every street at least once.

If the graph traveled has an Eulerian Circuit, this circuit is the ideal
solution.

That brings us to the question of how to know, whether the graph has an
Eulerian circuit, and the answer is [BEST
theorem](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BEST_theorem). It is is for directed
graphs. BEST does not stand for superlative of good, better, but is an acronym
for four names, with one being de Bruijn.

\--------------------------------------

In the above context, readers may amuse themselves with the history of two
influential European mathematicians - [Blanche
Descartes](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blanche_Descartes) and [Nicolas
Bourbaki](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nicolas_Bourbaki). Even though they
published [many scholarly books](http://www.amazon.com/General-Topology-
Chapters-Majorana-International/dp/3540642412/ref=sr_1_5?ie=UTF8&qid=135118035
5&sr=8-5&keywords=nicholas+bourbaki) and articles on graph theory and set
theory, the mathematicians did not exist.

![](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2012/10/41QGN2vdmtL
._BO2204203200_PIsitb-sticker-arrow-clickTopRight35-76_AA300_SH20_OU01_.jpg)

They were two groups of mathematicians from England and France writing under
pseudonym. The French group (Bourbaki) included [Andre
Weil](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andr%C3%A9_Weil) and [Szolem
Mandelbrojt](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Szolem_Mandelbrojt). If that
Mandelbrojt name sounds familiar, he was indeed the uncle of [Benoit
Mandelbrot of fractal fame](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Benoit_Mandelbrot).

![](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/cd/Mandelbrot_Set_-
_Periodicites.png/220px-Mandelbrot_Set_-_Periodicites.png)

British group (Descartes) included some of the BEST people - R. Leonard
Brooks, Arthur Harold Stone, Cedric Smith, and W. T. Tutte. BEST stands for de
Bruijn, van Aardenne-Ehrenfest, Cedric Smith and Tutte. If that Ehrenfest name
sounds familiar to physicists, she was indeed the daughter of Paul Ehrenfest.

