---
title: The World of Biological Databases
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
The world of biological databases is in a gigantic mess, and the problem gets
bigger as we go from genome sequences to transcriptomes and other expression-
related datasets. The mess is expected to get messier with increasing amount
of NGS sequences being available. Let us explain in more detail.
<!--more-->

To understand the larger context, we need to start from the principles of
evolution. Life on earth [originated and evolved from a common
ancestor](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evolution) over billions of years. The
common ancestor of vertebrates likely appeared hundreds of million years back
during [Cambrian explosion](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cambrian_explosion).
Externally, different organisms evolved unique sets of body parts to address
different environmental challenges, but those body parts, such as fish fins,
bird wings and human legs, came from the same set of genetic tool kits. In
that sense, a researcher investigating fish eye should find help from
transcriptional studies in human eye or mouse eye.

Unfortunately, various transcriptomal data sets are not easily comparable, and
the difficulty gets more acute as we move further away on the evolutionary
tree. Often the reason is more political than technical. Scientific
communities are divided into different groups such as 'cancer researchers',
'entomologists', 'fish geneticists', 'neurologists', 'plant biologists', etc.
Inter-comparison of data generated by those groups is barely possible at the
level of genome sequences, but when it comes to gene expressions, all bets are
off.

[Here](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_biological_databases#Genome_databa
ses) is a large list of various biological databases that were created to till
date. We are sure the list is far from complete, because we checked for two or
three databases that we are well familiar with and they were not included in
the wiki page. For example, the [Signal database at Salk
Institute](http://signal.salk.edu/) is a very useful transcriptome database
for plants not mentioned in the wiki page. [Rise database from
BGI](http://rice.genomics.org.cn/rice/index2.jsp) is helpful to researchers
working on rice.[SpBase](http://www.spbase.org/SpBase/) hosts data for sea
urchin community. Readers are welcome to mention any other useful database
that is not included in the wiki page.

Useful links:

[Wiki](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_biological_databases): list of
biological databases,

[Metadatabase](http://metadatabase.org/wiki/Main_Page): A database to link to
all biological databases,

[GEO](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/): NCBI gene expression depository,

[SRA](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/): NCBI short read archive also hosts
transcriptome data,

[Arrayexpress](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/): Gene expression depository
at EBI,

[emouse](http://www.emouseatlas.org/emage/home.php): Gene expression database
on mouse,

