---
title: Severe Abnormalities Found in Fukushima Butterflies
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
We decided to copy the title of a [BBC article](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news
/science-environment-19245818), but after making one major and needed
correction. We removed the quotes around 'Severe Abnormalities'.
<!--more-->

We do not know, what kind of dopes get to write articles for BBC, because the
[original study](http://www.nature.com/srep/2012/120809/srep00570/full/srep005
70.html#/f2) is as clear as it could be about linking severe abnormalities in
butterflies and Fukushima disaster. It is not as if BBC is an extremely
cautious and conservative source of news. Few days back, [BBC showed fake
pictures from Iraq of 2003](http://www.rt.com/news/bbc-iraq-syria-houla-400/)
to hype up war in Syria.

Getting back to the original [Scientific Reports article](http://www.nature.co
m/srep/2012/120809/srep00570/full/srep00570.html#/f2) on Fukushima, we
recommend everyone to read it, because it is a beautiful piece of scientific
study with very strong conclusions supported by extensive data.

> Here we show that the accident caused physiological and genetic damage to
the pale grass blue Zizeeria maha, a common lycaenid butterfly in Japan. We
collected the first-voltine adults in the Fukushima area in May 2011, some of
which showed relatively mild abnormalities. The F1 offspring from the first-
voltine females showed more severe abnormalities, which were inherited by the
F2 generation. Adult butterflies collected in September 2011 showed more
severe abnormalities than those collected in May. Similar abnormalities were
experimentally reproduced in individuals from a non-contaminated area by
external and internal low-dose exposures. We conclude that artificial
radionuclides from the Fukushima Nuclear Power Plant caused physiological and
genetic damage to this species.

The figures in the above paper are highly informative, but you may not
understand the significance, until you combine their observations with the
following figure ([population density of
Japan](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demographics_of_Japan)).

![](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2012/08/japan-300x300.png)

Most people in Japan live in the black and deep brown regions, and it is
roughly where the Fukushima disaster struck.

Long-term human impact of Fukushima nuclear accident may be incalculable, and
we will not not know until an entire generation of Japanese children grows up.

