---
title: Software Carpentry - Very Good Place to Learn Scientific Programming
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
We are adding few new links to our top level list of blogs and forums. They
are good places to start your learning experience of various aspect of
bioinformatics.
<!--more-->

1\. **Software Carpentry**: [Software Carpentry](http://software-
carpentry.org/) by Greg Wilson appears to be a good place to start learning
about scientific programming. We requested Greg to add a bit more, but here is
their mission statement -

> Our mission is to help scientists be more productive by teaching them basic
computing skills. Our approach combines short, intensive workshops with self-
paced online instruction. The benefits are more reliable results and higher
productivity: a day a week is common, and a ten-fold improvement isnt rare.

Edit. Greg responded to my email within 90 seconds, and sent the following
90-second pitch on software-carpentry !!

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/AHt3mgViyCs" frameborder="0"> </iframe>

2\. **Rosalind**: Rosalind teaches about algorithms through problem solving.
We wrote about [Rosalind Project](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/09/18
/rosalind-project-at-algorithmic-biology-laboratory-st-petersburg/) earlier.

3\. **Molecularevolution and Openhelix**: [We wrote
about](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/06/08/excellent-tutorials-for-velvet-
abyss-bowtie-bwa-and-newbler/) online tutorials on Velvet, Bowtie and Abyss at
[molecularevolution website](http://www.molecularevolution.org/).

We also [wrote earlier about Openhelix](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/07/27
/how-to-stay-current-in-bioinformaticsgenomics/), which has [many excellent
tutorials](http://www.openhelix.com/) to start learning how to use
bioinformatics tools.

4\. **Simply Statistics blog**: [The blog by Rafael
Irizary](http://simplystatistics.org/) and colleagues needs no introduction.
It is among the best online resources to learn statistics and stay up to date
with cutting edge thoughts.

5\. **Haldane's Sieve:** It is a new blog by three revolutionaries - Graham
Coop, Bryan Howie and Joe Pickrell - to discuss preprints in population and
evolutionary genomics. Why do we call them revolutionaries? It is simply
because they see the world changing from locked up publishing to open-source
publishing, and doing something to stay ahead of the curve.

We plan to write more about Haldane's Sieve in a separate blog post.

