---
title: A Real-life Example of Our Forecast for 21st Century
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
In three earlier posts, we discussed -
<!--more-->

[Top N Reasons NOT to do a Ph.D. in Bioinformatics/Computational
Biology](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/08/11/top-n-reasons-not-to-do-a-ph-d
-in-bioinformaticscomputational-biology/)

[Our Vision for Biology of 21st
Century](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/08/16/our-vision-for-biology-during-
21st-century/)

[A Chart to Back our Forecast for 21st
Century](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/08/21/a-chart-to-back-our-forecast-
for-21st-century/)

and they ended with "So, we will not be surprised, if the rights to most high-
tech US companies and their patents get transferred to more responsible
countries during the coming debt reduction phase. Naturally, that will be the
place for genomic century."

\---------------------

From Today's news (posting from [Omics! Omics!
blog](http://omicsomics.blogspot.co.uk/2012/09/bgi-gobbles-complete-
genomics.html))-

> **BGI Gobbles Complete Genomics**

An email this morning alerted me that BGI Shenzhen is acquiring Complete
Genomics. I hadn't been following Complete's business very carefully and had
missed (or forgotten about) their quarterly report in August warning that they
were dangerously low on cash and had engaged a firm to look at strategic
alternatives. If you are holding Complete Shares (with the wonderful ticker
symbol GNOM), you'll get $3.15 cash for each for them. If you were unfortunate
enough to buy them at the top, that's over $11 a share in capital loss to put
on next year's tax returns.

The debt reduction phase is only at the beginning, and there will be many more
fire-sales going forward. So, we still [stick to our
suggestion](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/08/11/top-n-reasons-not-to-
do-a-ph-d-in-bioinformaticscomputational-biology/) \-

> Instead of being all negative, we also like to make some constructive
suggestions to young students. If there is one thing homolog.us blog would
recommend to young biology students, that is to learn Chinese and translate a
biology paper to Chinese. It is far more important language to learn at this
point of your career than C, C++ or Java.

