---
title: Two Thoughtful Comments
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
From Andrew Bromage on [Bioinformatics versus Real
Life](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/11/05/bioinformatics-versus-real-
life/):
<!--more-->

> Modern democratic systems understand this. Elections are a very blunt tool
which answer only one large question, namely, which people are to do the job
of representation. They are not actually about specific issues, which is why
they dont actually happen that often.

If you actually care enough about specific issues, there are a large number of
more fine-grained tools available to you. You could write to or meet with an
elected representative or their staff. You could bring it to the attention of
the media or social media. You could organise or participate in a public
meeting or protest. You could take the government to court. You could even
stand for office yourself.

A lot can be said about how well the US system specifically works in practice,
especially at the moment, and especially when it comes to the role of big
money. Nonetheless, the theory makes sense: Its all of these other tools which
actually bring specific issues to the attention of the government. Elections
are the blunt instrument which (in theory) make the rest of these tools work,
by providing an ultimate reality check on how responsive elected officials are
to all of the other ways the citizenry can use to influence their decision-
making.

To put it another way, the GC content is rarely what youre ultimately
interested in.

Thanks Andrew. Maybe Australia is different due to its smaller and more
homogeneous population. We suffered through two very large democracies (USA
and India) to know that the fine-grained tools rarely work in practice in
large systems. If a country can be 'divided and conquered', moneyed interests
know how to play various groups against each other. Larger the country, easier
it is to rule using money and propaganda (misinformation).

Adam on [Question from a Reader on Studying
Bioinformatics](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/10/13/a-question-from-reader-
on-studying-bioinformatics/):

> Interesting points. A few comments:-heated discussion often ensues as to the
best route into bioinformatics computer science to biology or vice versa.
Ultimately I suspect it doesnt matter much, as one of our goals is to
eliminate traditional disciplinary boundaries. One thing I would say is:
ensure that your methods are relevant and address real-life biological
problems. Ive seen a lot of examples where someone presents a cute or clever
computational technique of which they are very proud, but its application is
almost an afterthought. Multiple incremental refinements which allegedly
generate more accurate multiple alignments is my favourite example of this.
Ultimately, biologists are looking to you to solve their problems they dont
care if algorithm X is better than function Y.-a lot of biologists are
uncomfortable with computers not to mention maths, statistics, physics,
engineering and more or less anything outside of the gene that they are
cloning or the organism they are studying. Its a real challenge getting those
types of people to realise what theyre missing out on. Give them lots of
simple, practical examples and theyll get it eventually.-biology is indeed
complex. But biological processes are also consistent and reproducible. Again,
the challenge is getting biologists to understand that physical processes
cause what we observe, as opposed to something mysterious and peculiar to
biological systems. Some biologists also confuse lots of data with complex
data . A microarray experiment may generate a matrix with many thousands of
rows, but thats not complex data its a lot of data. And handling a lot of data
is what computers do.-Im with you on Perl. Simply because a lot of data
formats and program outputs are plain old ASCII and Perl was designed with
text processing in mind. And of course, because of Bioperl which is just
fantastic and makes my life inestimably easier every day.-offering your
services is both a blessing and a curse. Particularly if as I am, you are the
sole source of bioinformatics skills in a department of computer-illiterate
biologists. It is satisfying when you provide a script or web page in 30
minutes which saves your colleague weeks or months of work and it may win
their admiration and respect. However, its very easy to fall into the role of
service provider, which from a career point of view can be frustrating. Whilst
your input is valued and seen as essential, it can also feel as though all you
provide is technical support to the bigger picture (think: a string of 3rd,
4th or 5th authorships or even we thank xxx for computational assistance ). So
make sure you keep a couple of your own projects on the boil at all times.

While we were away, we received several comments coming from facebook links.
Some of them, like the above one, are directly relevant to the topic of
discussion, while the others are unrelated to the main commentary even though
they seem technically sound (check one posted
[here](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/09/19/kind-of-comments-we-receive-
every-day/)). We are not sure what is going on, but decided to let those
comments stay for the time being.

