---
title: NASA Changes Biology Textbooks - Again
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
A press release [ posted on NASA's website on Dec. 2
2010](http://astrobiology.nasa.gov/articles/thriving-on-arsenic/) says -
<!--more-->

> Get Your Biology Textbook...and an Eraser!

One of the basic assumptions about life on Earth may be due for a revision
thanks to research supported by NASAs Astrobiology Program. Geomicrobiologist
Felisa Wolfe-Simon has discovered a bacterium in Californias Mono Lake that
uses arsenic instead of phosphorus in its DNA. Up until now, it was believed
that all life required phosphorus as a fundamental piece of the backbone that
holds DNA together. The discovery of an organism that thrives on otherwise
poisonous arsenic broadens our thinking about the possibility of life on other
planets, and begs a rewrite of biology textbooks by changing our understanding
of how life is formed from its most basic elemental building blocks.
Astrobiology Magazine has the story.

After reading the press release, we borrowed erasers from our kids and
painstakingly removed all references to phosphorus from our biology text
books.

Now it appears that the books need to be changed again, and this time back to
their original form. Two new papers by [Corky Marlinson and Rachel
Sexton](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deception_Point) dispute NASA's claim of
reinventing biology.

A [press release](http://www.nature.com/news/arsenic-loving-bacterium-needs-
phosphorus-after-all-1.10971) by Nature says -

> Rosie Redfield, a microbiologist at the University of British Columbia in
Vancouver, Canada, set about testing the finding. Earlier this year, she said
that she could not reproduce Wolfe-Simons results in laboratory experiments
(see Study challenges existence of arsenic-based life).

Redfield is now a co-author of one of two papers that confirm that, although
the bacteria can tolerate arsenic, they do depend on phosphorus. The papers
were published by Science on 8 July.

Wolfe-Simon, the author of original study, [said in
response](http://www.usatoday.com/tech/science/story/2012-07-07/arsenic-
microbe/56098788/1) \- "There is nothing in the data of these new papers that
contradicts our published data." That response surely beats Bill Clinton's
["It depends on what the meaning of the word 'is' is."](http://www.slate.com/a
rticles/news_and_politics/chatterbox/1998/09/bill_clinton_and_the_meaning_of_i
s.html), because Wolfe-Simon's controversial statement sits right in her title
-

![](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/fellisa-
300x127.jpg)

We wish Dr. Wolfe-Simon success in her career as a California
<del>scientist</del> politician.

