---
title: In our Trends Section
tags: []
categories:
- rnaseq
---
We updated the [trends section](http://www.homolog.us/CI/index.php/charts)
with latest data.
<!--more-->

The [GEO database has been growing
steadily](http://www.homolog.us/CI/index.php/charts/growth_geo), but we
believe the large peak in Q4 of 2011 was an outlier.

![](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2012/06/geo1-300x212.png)

What could cause such an outlier? Although we do not have any concrete data to
back this assertion, [welfare spending on academics](http://en.wikipedia.org/w
iki/American_Recovery_and_Reinvestment_Act_of_2009) is likely to be the prime
candidate. The grants were approved in later part of 2009 or early 2010, and
based on typical time to do research, write papers and get them
reviewed/accepted, it is quite reasonable to expect many ARRA papers to be
published around late 2011.

Speaking of SRA database, it is interesting to find that the [exponential
trend up to late 2010](http://www.homolog.us/CI/index.php/charts/growth_sra)
that made NCBI [panic into announcing shutdown of
SRA](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2011/08/28/geo-and-sra-quarterly-growth-in-
transcriptomic-research/) did not continue or come back. One may say that the
'measures taken by the government were effective in removing the backlog' or
one may say that NCBI panicked prematurely. Which point of view you choose
depends on your [color-coded political
affiliation](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Red_states_and_blue_states).

![](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2012/06/geo2-300x229.png)

Among global hotbeds of transcriptomics, Stanford is no longer the leader and
has been taken over by Toronto and Boston. Anyone, who tracked the data for
individual cities over the years ([presented
here](http://www.homolog.us/CI/index.php/charts/cities)), should have expected
the outcome. Is the shift related to cost of living around Stanford that made
young and productive researchers move out to other cities? Or is it due to
other universities catching up with the early success of Stanford with array
technology?

![](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2012/06/geo3-210x300.png)

You can find [many other interesting charts at the trends
section](http://www.homolog.us/CI/index.php/charts). In the next commentary,
we will show how the interests of researchers has been shifting from
traditional array experiments to next-generation technologies. Surprisingly, a
technology other than high-throughput sequencing is making major inroads.
Also, many researchers around the globe are showing interests in studying new
mammal outside the traditional set of human, mouse and rat. Which one is it?
Stay tuned to find out.

