---
title: IPython Notebook and de Bruijn Graph
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
IPython Notebook is an excellent tool for visualizing graphs. For
introduction, please check this video from C. T. Brown.
<!--more-->

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/HaS4NXxL5Qc" frameborder="0"> </iframe>

Also, the following two tutorials from his student (disowned, see comment :))
are helpful - [here](http://www.randalolson.com/2012/05/10/ipython-notebook/)
and [here](http://www.randalolson.com/2012/05/12/a-short-demo-on-how-to-use-
ipython-notebook-as-a-research-notebook/).

We have not used it yet, but would like to get started soon. One big reason is
a demo for de Bruijn graphs from Jason Chin, a talented physicist and
bioinformatician, who also brings us an amazing variety of cool information
through his Twitter feed [infoecho](https://twitter.com/infoecho). Did we
mention that he also knows PacBio technology inside out?

>

Check out this if you are a IPython Notebook fan.

https://github.com/cschin/ipython_d3_mashup/blob/master/ipython_13_vis_example
/De_Bruijn_VIS.ipynb

It used IPython Notebook + d3.js to get interactive visualization for de
Bruijn Graphs

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/8MsMk2eht8I" frameborder="0"> </iframe>

\------------------------------

P. S.

Jason Chin also asked this question -

![](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2012/10/Capture9-300x73.png)

Internet is a completely anarchic medium of exchange, and so we expect to see
all types of Twitter feeds, ranging from 'very chatty' to 'speak only'. That
does not bother us, and the amazing thing about internet tools like Twitter is
that they can bring such wide range of people together to communicate.

We are not 'speak only' in Twitter, but we are definitely among 'follow few'
and here is why. We are trying to figure out how to use Twitter as [our mini
Haldane's Sieve](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/10/19/thoughts-on-blogging-
and-haldanes-seive/), and for that, we decided to follow few high-quality
/high-volume feeds. The choices are arbitrary and purely subjective. We hope
those feeds will retweet anything they find interesting, and save our work of
trying to read every single paper.

We wanted to name the strategy [nani gigantum humeris
insidentes](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_on_the_shoulders_of_giants)
:)

