---
title: SOAPdenovo2 and Other News from BGI
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
We heard in the grapevine that BGI assembled a very complex
(=<del>highly</del> insanely polymorphic) genome of an eukaryotic organism.
The paper is close to being accepted, and we hope to learn some new techniques
on genome assembly from it.
<!--more-->

We have not commented much on
[SOAPdenovo](http://soap.genomics.org.cn/soapdenovo.html), the de Bruijn
graph-based genome assembly program from BGI. It is supposedly one of the best
assemblers out there based on past [Assemblathon](http://assemblathon.org/)
results. However, the source code was not released and therefore it was
difficult for us to comment much on the algorithm. All that is going to change
soon, based on these correspondences sent to BGI-SOAP mailing list from
Ruibang Luo of BGI.

> Ruibang Luo

Wed, Jun 13, 2012 at 7:44 PM

And we will release SOAPdenovo2 soon, we may put it on SourceForge, where the
interactions between developer and users can be searched by other users with
similar problems.

rb

>

Ruibang Luo

Sun, Jun 17, 2012 at 8:03 PM

It's about to release in next month.

For you convenience, you can join out testing to use SOAPdenovo2 in advance to
the formal publish.

rb

\-------------------

If you do not know much about the operations at BGI, here is a [nice
overview](http://www.nature.com/news/2010/100303/full/464022a.html) from
Nature news.

Some interesting factoids:

1\. Although BGI started in Beijing, it now moved to Shenzhen in south China.
How far are those two cities? You can imagine Caltech moving to Houston.

2\. BGI operates by taking a 10-billion-renminbi loan (US $1.57B) from the
China Development Bank. So, researchers are highly indebted to the bank. That
is quite different from US model, where [professors' salaries come from
students being put on lifelong debt](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/04/04
/economic-recovery-is-on-the-back-of-students/).

