---
title: A Review of Bioinformatics Blogs
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
To stay up to date with our commentaries, please follow us on twitter
[here](http://twitter.com/#!/homolog_us/)
<!--more-->

Today we are reviewing and cleaning up the blog links at the right sidebar.
Here are few short comments on each link in our current blogroll. Please note
that the opinions presented below are biased by our current research
interests.

The following three blogs are the ones most visited by us.

[Living in an Ivory Basement](http://ivory.idyll.org/blog)

It is a blog maintained by Titus Brown, a Professor from Michigan State
University. In our opinion, this blog is class apart from other NGS-related
blogs, and represents the best value among all.

Why do we say so? It is because Professor Brown's lab is pushing the limits on
NGS analysis on many front, and is coming out with several promising
algorithms to handle very large NGS data sets. By following his blog, you can
stay current on their cutting-edge research, and have lead time of months over
others, who learn about their cool discoveries from printed pages of journals.

The blog is updated once a week, but many updates have enough value to keep
you thinking for weeks.

[NGS Stuart Brown](http://nextgenseq.blogspot.com/)

The blog is maintained by Stuart Brown, an Associate Professor at NYU School
of Medicine. In professor Brown's words, it is "a working guide to the rapidly
developing world of Next-Generation DNA sequencing, with an emphasis on
bioinformatics." The blog is updated once every two months or so, and the
updates are generally insightful.

[RNA-seq Blog](http://www.rna-seqblog.com/)

This blog provides daily updates on published algorithms and research results
related to RNA-seq.

* * *

Following two blogs are updated very frequently with information from all
domains of genomics.

[Openhelix](http://blog.openhelix.eu/)

It is maintained by the company Openhelix LLC, and provides daily information
on various topics related to genomics.

[Tree of Life](http://phylogenomics.blogspot.com/)

This one is maintained by Jonathan Eisen, Professor at UC Davis. His interests
span many areas of biology, and the blog provides information from all
domains. Many discussions are related to phylogenomics of microbes.

* * *

The following three blogs are technically oriented. You will need them to get
things done.

[Getting Genetics Done](http://gettinggeneticsdone.blogspot.ch/)

It is maintained by Stephen Turner, an Assistant Professor of public health
sciences and director of the Bioinformatics Core at the University of
Virginia. He posts many interesting R codes from time to time. The blog is
updated once in every two weeks.

[The Genome Factory](http://thegenomefactory.blogspot.com.au/)

This blog is maintained by Australian bioinformatician Torsten Seemann, who
probably understands Velvet as well as its original author. It contains many
short coding tips useful for NGS analysis. It is updates once every month.

[Blue Collar Bioinformatics](http://bcbio.wordpress.com/)

Another very good blog with many useful codes. It is maintained by Brad
Chapman, a biologist and programmer working in the bioinformatics core at
Harvard School of Public Health. The updates are infrequent but highly
informative. The author went MIA since March, 2012.

Edit.

Peter Cook kindly sent [another link](http://chapmanb.posterous.com/) for Brad
Chapman's blog that is updated more recently.

* * *

The following three blogs are organism-specific with focus on NGS data.

[The Hyphal Tip](http://fungalgenomes.org/blog/)

Maintained by Jason Stajich, it is the best source of information on fungi.
Updates come almost daily, except when they do not :)

[Casey Bergmann](http://bergmanlab.smith.man.ac.uk/?page_id=45/)

Very good source of information on Drosophila-related research.

[Pathogens - Nick Loman](http://pathogenomics.bham.ac.uk/blog/)

An informative blog on latest research related to NGS.

[Mass Genomics](http://massgenomics.org/)

If you want to know how NGS technologies impact research related to human
health, this blog is the best place to visit.

* * *

We like the following six blogs for various 'non-specific' reasons ranging
from insightful commentaries to cool picture of giant corn.

[James and Giant Corn](http://www.jamesandthegiantcorn.com/)

[In Between Lines of Code](http://flxlexblog.wordpress.com/)

[Jerm Demo](http://jermdemo.blogspot.com/)

[Public Rambling](http://pbeltrao.blogspot.com/)

[Scienceroll](http://scienceroll.com/)

Please feel free to mention any other good blog that we may have missed.

\----------------

Edit.

We got requests by email and comments about few other excellent blogs.

[Manuel Corpas](http://manuelcorpas.com/)

It is maintained by a bioinformatics expert from UK. One interesting part of
his blog is his efforts get the genomes of his family members sequenced
[through crowd-sourced fundraising](http://manuelcorpas.com/2012/06/19
/donations-sought-for-whole-genome-sequencing-40-days-to-go/).

[Pierre Lindenbaums blog](http://plindenbaum.blogspot.com.br/)

It is a technically oriented blog similar to 'Getting Genetics Done' or 'Blue
Collar Bioinformatics' mentioned above. He has many helpful scripts to get
work done.

[Byte size bio](http://bytesizebio.net/)

An informative blog covering many aspects of biology. It is updated almost
daily.

[EdgeBio Blog](http://www.edgebio.com/blog)

EdgeBio is a Maryland-based company [providing high-quality nucleic acid
purification products to the scientific research
community](http://www.edgebio.com/about). [Their
blog](http://www.edgebio.com/blog) has interesting information on exome
sequencing and related topics. It is updated twice or thrice every month.

[Kevin's GATTACCA world](http://kevin-gattaca.blogspot.com/)

It was the first bioinformatics blog we ever read long before most others
mentioned above were born. Then we forgot about it until rediscovering the
blog somewhat fortuitously.

Do you want to know how? We were going through a set of T-cell diversity
sequences, and ran google search on a motif. A variation of the motif took us
to the movie [GATTACCA](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gattaca) and Kevin's
blog.

Kevin writes a lot on bioinformatics and programming, but he can make you
laugh with his coverage of bioinformatics ads, such as [here](http://kevin-
gattaca.blogspot.com/2011/11/employment-ads-do-you-have-mad-ngs.html) and
[here](http://kevin-gattaca.blogspot.com/2012/06/bioinformatician-data-finish-
quality.html).

