---
title: More is Different !!
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
The hype about discovery of Higgs boson easily competes with Facebook IPO as
the most overrated event of 2012. [London
Independent](http://www.independent.co.uk/news/science/eureka-cern-announces-
discovery-of-higgs-boson-god-particle-7907677.html) reports -
<!--more-->

> Discovering the so-called Higgs boson particle would be one of the greatest
achievements in science, rivaling the discovery of the structure of DNA in
1953 and the Apollo moon landings of the 1960s and 1970s.

We beg to differ, and here is why.

In the earlier half of 20th century, physicists believed that if they could
find an unifying theory for various physical forces (quantum mechanics,
electricity, magnetism, gravitation), everything else in nature could be
explained trivially. The trend toward unification started with Maxwell's
seminal publication of four equations unifying electricity and magnetism
(1861-62). Einstein spent much of his later life trying to unify quantum
mechanics, gravitation and electromagnetics, because unification of all
theories was **the most important problem in physics**. Afterward, two other
subatomic phenomena - weak and strong nuclear interactions - got added to the
wish list. Discovery of Higgs boson in 2012 does provide one important piece
of the unification puzzle, but is unification the most important problem any
more?

Understanding developed since 1950s changed the sentiment of physicists toward
the merits of unification. The first major surprise came, when [Bardeen,
Cooper and Schriefer explained superconductivity in
1957](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BCS_theory). Prior to that, Feynman tried
unsuccessfully for years to understand superconductivity from first
principles. BCS theory made it very clear to him and others that
superconductivity could not be trivially derived from the basic theory of
quantum electrodynamics.

If there is one article that you can read to understand how the attitudes of
physicists toward grand unification changed from the early part of 20th
century to later, it is ['More is Different' by P. W.
Anderson](http://www.meso2012.com/pdfs/AndersonScience177,393,72.pdf). The
whole article is highly readable and follows from his discoveries in broken
symmetry, but we would like you to especially reflect on the pre-closing
paragraph -

> The arrogance of the particle physicist and his intensive research may be
behind us (the discoverer of positron said "the rest is chemistry"), but we
have yet to recover from that of some molecular biologists, who only try to
reduce everything about the human organism to "only" chemistry, from the
common cold and all mental disease to the religious instinct. Surely there are
more levels of organization between human ethology and DNA than there are
between DNA and quantum electrodynamics, and each level can require a whole
new conceptual structure.

Professor Anderson received Nobel prize in physics for his discoveries in
localization and antiferromagnetism, but one of his biggest achievements (in
our opinion) was to help shut down [this monster
project](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Superconducting_Super_Collider) to look
for, you guessed it right, Higgs boson.

