---
title: On 'Research Code' by Deepak Singh
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
[Iddo Friedberg says](http://bytesizebio.net/index.php/2012/08/24/can-we-make-
research-software-accountable/) \-
<!--more-->

> Science is messing around with things you dont know.

....

This practices of code writing for day-to-day lab research are therefore
completely unlike anything software engineers are taught.

[Deepak Singh responds](http://blog.deepaksingh.net/research-code/) \-

> Just reading these lines and seeing other issues Ive seen with academic code
makes me think of a few things. (1) Scientific programmers are either poor
programmers or lazy programmers. That means that a lot of the reasons
scientific code is not robust or maintainable is because they dont know how to
write robust code.

Based on our experience of working in almost all branches of science
(electrical engineering, theoretical physics, computational biology,
computational chemistry) as well as at large and small Silicon Valley
companies and **for US government**, we believe the main difference of two
opinions is money.

The monetary aspects of a company is straightforward. A company makes one or
more products useful for customers, and customers pay them for making their
life easy. The executives of the company allocate part of that revenue among
various projects. If the allocations are correct, productive groups thrive and
unproductive groups die. If the allocations are consistently wrong, the
company dies or get bailed out (i.e. taken over by the government).

The monetary aspects of a research project are far more complex. Academia is
already where companies reach after failing. It is run and paid by the
government.

**Step 1.** A researcher is asked by his institution to raise research funds from government, even though more money is not directly proportional to more innovation. In fact, [some times the opposite is true](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/08/16/where-are-innovative-ngs-algorithms-coming-from/). 

**Step 2.** The researcher does not know how research can lead to more grants, because the process is completely unpredictable. Some researchers assume that publishing voluminously gets them more money. Some assume that publishing in high-profile journal makes the granting gods happy. Some build rapport with fund administrators. 

Pray tell what the value of writing code properly is in the above complex and
opaque process.

