---
title: Homolog.us Blog Covers Olympiad
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
The whole world has gone crazy about the Olympics, and we could not stay away.
Last week, we decided to meet an ex-'Olympian' and asked him few questions
about his experiences. Here is our conversation in Q/A format.
<!--more-->

_Q. You are not a real Olympian, but an Olympian within quotes. Why should we
give you any coverage here?_

A. (smiling)....because the [gymnasts are out partying at
nightclubs](http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2185711/Aly-Raisman-
accidentally-tweets-Fierce-Five-planning-night-town-male-gymnasts.html), and
Michael Phelps did not return your call.

_Q. Please tell our readers about [International Mathematics
Olympiad](http://www.imo-official.org/)._

A. It is an international competition among young mathematicians from many
countries. It started with only 7 countries in 1959, but now over hundred
countries participate. Every country is allowed to send exactly six young
mathematicians to compete.

_Q. Where does it take place?_

A. The event rotates between many countries around the world. This year it
took place in Argentina. Colombia will be the host in 2013. Braunschweig, West
Germany hosted the event in our year.

_Q. Please tell us, how you were selected as a member of your national team._

A. It happened through strange confluence of events. In mid-1988, someone
posted a small notice on our school board about a mathematics contest, where
our school was requested to send five kids. I was crazy about mathematics and
everyone knew that I was crazy about mathematics. However, the head of our
school decided to send 'five top students' based on general ranks, and my rank
was sixth. Thankfully, two of those top five were not interested, and so I
managed to sneak in.

The 'math contest' was an one hour exam with the strangest kinds of math
problems. I never saw anything like that before. To understand the statement,
you need some background on Indian school system. In our schools, we were
typically given lessons on one or other math topic, and then were asked few
questions related to the topic. The questions were difficult at times, but we
were always able to place it within a box with limited number of tool kits.
Even the much vaunted IIT entrance test was not too different. I used to be
completely bored with those tests.

The questions in this contest were more like free-form puzzles and we were not
even able to locate any standard tool kit to solve them. I had to use any
technique I could think of to answer them. It was great fun and I thanked the
organizers for providing me with an hour's entertainment. At that point, I had
no idea about the purpose of the contest, and neither did the adults present
in the room.

Continued [here](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/08/11/homolog-us-continues-
its-interview-of-ex-olympic-participant/)

