---
title: Obituary of Nimblegen
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
We spent a large part of our life in biology using Nimblegen's arrays (only a
small subset here -
[link](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/306/5705/2242.abstract),
[link](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/314/5801/960.abstract),
[link](http://www.pnas.org/content/103/11/4192.abstract),
[link](http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v465/n7298/full/nature09016.html))
and therefore was saddened to hear about the closure of [Nimblegen array
business](http://www.genomeweb.com/arrays/roche-nimblegen-quit-array-market-
lay-majority-staff-close-european-facilities).
<!--more-->

>

**Roche NimbleGen to Quit Array Market, Lay off Majority of Staff, Close European Facilities**

Roche has decided to shutter its NimbleGen microarray business, and will phase
out array production and services by the end of the year. At the same time,
the firm will continue to provide target enrichment products for use with
next-generation sequencing, a spokesperson confirmed last week.

As part of the restructuring, most current Roche NimbleGen employees will lose
their jobs. The spokesperson told BioArray News that 44 out of the company's
100 staffers at its headquarters in Madison, Wis., will be laid off by year
end, while all 76 positions at the company's facilities in Iceland and Germany
will be eliminated.

Nimblegen's technology was very innovative, but its biggest obstacle was not
technological superiority, but boneheaded business execution by Affymetrix.
Ideally Nimblegen could fit within Affymetrix and form a strong competition
against the sequencing world. Instead, Affymetrix thought that the arrays
would not ever have any competition and decided to fight Nimblegen on patent
front. So, Nimblegen set up facility in Iceland (outside US/EU patent
jurisdiction) and ran experiments from there.

![](http://www.nanowerk.com/news/id17129.jpg)

The saddest part of Nimblegen saga was not the shutdown of array business, but
the untimely passing away of [Franco
Cerrina](http://www.nanowerk.com/news/newsid=17129.php), who created the
technology in his lab. Dr. Cerrina was a very innovative professor, who was
always testing one or other new idea. Apparently, on his fateful day, he was
testing a new device for medical diagnosis and got electrocuted by trying it
on himself in an empty lab on a Saturday morning. Few months before he passed
away, we were discussing about a table-top 'personalized' array instrument
that he built, which could cut down array cost to $5-$10/chip (with 1 million
feature) and bring the technology to every lab. That could have changed the
competitive picture for NGS.

