---
title: Homolog.us Continues Its Interview of ex-Olympian
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
If you did not read the earlier part, please [follow this
link.](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/08/09/homolog-us-blog-covers-
olympiad/)
<!--more-->

_Q. You were describing, how you got into the national team of your country to
be in maths olympic._

That is right. I told you about the fun math contest where we participated. We
almost forgot about it, but after four or five months, the main office of our
school received a strange letter. It came from some obscure office in Delhi,
and asked for two students to join them in an award ceremony. I was one.

![](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2012/08/india-300x223.png)

[Map of India](http://www.lonelyplanet.com/maps/asia/india/)

For work or other reasons, none of our parents were able to take us to Delhi.
To understand how unusual the idea of visiting Delhi alone was, you need to go
back to India of 1987-89. I grew up in Calcutta, a city in the eastern part of
India (see map). Delhi was a far away place, and took 1.5 to 2 days to reach
by train. The languages, customs, food - all were different from Calcutta. To
make matters worse, around 1987-89, terrorists made a nasty habit of blowing
up trains and buses around Delhi. Articles like the following appeared in our
newspapers almost every days.

![](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2012/08/punjab-300x129.png)

Source: NY Times

Our parents were not ready to let us go by ourselves and we had to put up very
sad faces to convince them. We were allowed to go, but with one condition - we
could not go anywhere outside after dark.

![](http://theplanetd.com/images/sad-face.jpg)

Personally I was not very afraid of terrorists. It was simple math of
probabilities. 34, or even 340, was a small number compared to population of
Delhi, and the probability of my getting caught in them was too small. I was
probably too young to understand fear.

_Q. Did the Olympic Selection Take Place in Delhi?_

No. We did not even know that the award ceremony was related to anything
bigger, when we left for Delhi.

About 40 or 50 kids from all parts of India showed up for this 4-5 day long
event. We met a very interesting math professor named [Shailesh
Shirali](http://www.indiatodayimages.com/indiatodayimages/buyimage-shailesh-
shirali-3505894.html).

![](http://www.indiatodayimages.com/indiatodayimages/Image?2009/preview/Shaile
sh%20Shirali-071109-Sanjay-06.jpg)

Dr. Shirali presented on a topic called '[Maxima and Minima without
Calculus](http://www.amazon.com/Without-Calculus-Dolciani-Mathematical-
Expositions/dp/088385306X)'. I found the presentation very stimulating.

![](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2012/08/without-calculus-
300x238.png)

In Delhi, we were informed about a one-month math training camp to take place
in Bangalore the following summer. We were told that it would be run by Dr.
Shirali, and three kids would be selected at the end of camp to go to
international mathematics olympiad. Every kid around me appeared extremely
bright, and I did not feel like I had a fleeting chance to be among the top
three. Still the idea of learning from Dr. Shirali seemed like an interesting
idea, and I signed up. My other friend from school dropped out at that point.

Continued [here](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/08/12/olympics-training-
camps-are-no-fun/)

