---
title: Do Illumina and Pacific Bio Fit Together?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
The following post is not financial opinion of any sort. It is general
rambling about various uncertainties that are affecting our decision process,
and possibly the same for others in the same boat.
<!--more-->

Based on our bioinformatics work, we are generally excited about Pacific Bio
sequences, but when we talk to our collaborators about buying instruments,
viability of the company itself appears to be a big concern. After all, who
wants to get stuck with a million dollar instrument from a company that is no
longer in business? Even worse, many senior managers fear the embarrassment of
buying an instrument from a company that goes belly up on the day they close
the deal !!

We do not know anything about the financial prospects of PacBio other than two
publicly available pieces of information - (i) their stock price (not looking
healthy), (ii) their financial reports (revenue going down, not up). What
happens, when a company goes belly up? Let us speak in general terms, because
we do not know much about PacBio.

The very fact that a company is not viable means it earns less by selling its
product than it spends on salaries and materials. However, that does not mean
the technology itself is unsustainable. Generally, a company has four five
major categories of expenses -

(i) salaries of engineers and other employees building the product,

(ii) cost of materials,

(iii) salaries of executives,

(iv) salaries of those working in sales and marketing,

(v) lawyers, accountants, admins and HR, etc.

A sequencing company earns money from two sources -

(vi) Selling the instrument (one big chunk of money),

(vii) Selling chemicals for sequencing (continued source of small income).

If PacBio is not viable and another company buys it, it can cut the costs in
tags: []
categories (iii), (iv) and (v), the technology can be made sustainable.
Moreover, it can lower the price of (vi) and raise the price of (vii) to
improve business.

Earlier we spoke about three way Mexican standoff between [Life Tech, Illumina
and Roche](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/08/24/nextera-kit-for-exome-
capture/). In our opinion, PacBio fits with Illumina the best. They have the
right contrasts to make the combined business work well.

1\. PacBio reads are noisy and long. Illumina reads are short and clean.

2\. Illumina reads are great for starting a genome assembly project, and
[PacBio reads are great for finishing](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/08/02
/mixing-illumina-and-pacbio-data-for-genome-finishing/).

3\. [PACB](http://stockcharts.com/h-sc/ui?s=PACB&p=D&yr=1&mn=0&dy=0&id=p563076
47729) stocks were high during early in the year and kept falling down. [ILMN]
(http://stockcharts.com/h-sc/ui?s=ILMN&p=D&yr=1&mn=0&dy=0&id=p56307647729)
stocks were low in Jan and had been mostly going up.

4\. IMHO, Illumina has more room for acquisition of other biotech companies
than Life Tech and Roche.

5\. [Researchers already showed](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/tag/pac-bio/) how
to clean PacBio reads with Illumina. One interesting product could be a
combined sequencing library that releases clean PacBio sequences right from
the instrument after doing a software cleanup.

