---
title: In Turf Battle for Computational Biology, CTB Fires a Shot
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Biologists are not trained to do computation, and the vacuum is being filled
by researchers from various other fields - computer science, physics, maths,
electrical engineering, etc. Naturally, a turf battle is developing, and [in
his xldb talk](http://www-
conf.slac.stanford.edu/xldb2012/talks/xldb2012_tue_0935_TitusBrown.pdf), C.
Titus fires a shot at his 'enemies'.
<!--more-->

\------------------------------

The biggest claim here is that knowledge of physics is not useful to
understand biological system. At one level, the claim is valid. For example,
in his '[More is Different](http://robotics.cs.tamu.edu/dshell/cs689/papers/an
derson72more_is_different.pdf)' paper, P. W. Anderson explained that each
higher order science is different from its immediate lower order science due
to symmetry breaking. So, someone with very good understanding of atomic and
nuclear physics cannot be expected to solve puzzles in chemistry simply
because chemicals are made of atoms. However, most good physicists know that
and biology is several orders removed from atomic physics anyway.

On another level, physicists try to explain natural phenomena from a large set
of mathematical tool kits. Good physicists are supposed to study and
understand a natural behavior, find out the mathematical properties of the
behavior and then find an appropriate model for it. From that angle, I do not
see how knowledge of physics, which essentially turns out to be expertise in a
large set of mathematical tool kits, cannot help in biology. However, as it
happens, the physicists trained in only one aspect of physics may have used
only a small set of mathematical tool kits for his PhD or so, and may get
frustrated, if those tool kits do not solve a biological problem. That is more
an individual issue in my opinion than general criticism with physics-based
approach.

I generally observed that many thought-provoking questions asked by physicists
get completely ignored by biologists, because they do not even understand why
the question is thought-provoking. Leibler's 2002 paper titled [Establishment
of developmental precision and proportions in the early Drosophila
embryo](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11845210) got generally ignored by
developmental biologists, even though it raised an important question
regarding their most fundamental assertion related to developmental precision.
[Leibler](https://appext.rockefeller.edu/facpub/do/query_pub_list?author1=Leib
ler+S&yearFrom=1900) continued to do interesting work asking questions on many
other simple biological models, but they rarely get discussed by biologists,
because biologists already **'accepted'** the models.

If CTB wants to continue to make his claims on physics-based model and
understandinf, we request him to start with Leibler's Drosophila paper and
explain why no developmental biologist loses sleep over the kind of questions
raised by his paper.

