---
title: Open-source Legal Site Groklaw is Shutting Down on Privacy Concerns
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
While Titus Brown called us ['insanely ignorant' for not agreeing with his
views on snooping](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/06/10/titus-brown-
offers-new-class-on-internet-realities/), other website founders are going to
the extent of shutting down to remain sane.
<!--more-->

> **Groklaw was an award-winning website covering legal news of interest to
the free and open source software community. Started as a law blog on May 16,
2003 by paralegal Pamela Jones ("PJ") at Radio UserLand, it has covered issues
such as the SCO-Linux lawsuits, the EU anti-trust case against Microsoft, and
the standardization of Office Open XML.**

Do you notice the word 'was'? Here is what happened, based on today's blog
post by the founder of Groklaw.

> The owner of Lavabit tells us that he's stopped using email and if we knew
what he knew, we'd stop too.

There is no way to do Groklaw without email. Therein lies the conundrum.

What to do?

What to do? I've spent the last couple of weeks trying to figure it out. And
the conclusion I've reached is that there is no way to continue doing Groklaw,
not long term, which is incredibly sad. But it's good to be realistic. And the
simple truth is, no matter how good the motives might be for collecting and
screening everything we say to one another, and no matter how "clean" we all
are ourselves from the standpoint of the screeners, I don't know how to
function in such an atmosphere. I don't know how to do Groklaw like this.

Years ago, when I was first on my own, I arrived in New York City, and being
naive about the ways of evil doers in big cities, I rented a cheap apartment
on the top floor of a six-floor walkup, in the back of the building. That of
course, as all seasoned New Yorkers could have told me, meant that a burglar
could climb the fire escape or get to the roof by going to the top floor via
the stairs inside and then through the door to the roof and climb down to the
open window of my apartment.

That is exactly what happened. I wasn't there when it happened, so I wasn't
hurt in any way physically. And I didn't then own much of any worth, so only a
few things were taken. But everything had been pawed through and thrown about.
I can't tell how deeply disturbing it is to know that someone, some stranger,
has gone through and touched all your underwear, looked at all your
photographs of your family, and taken some small piece of jewelry that's been
in your family for generations.

If it's ever happened to you, you know I couldn't live there any more, not one
night more. It turned out, by the way, according to my neighbors, that it was
almost certainly the janitor's son, which stunned me at the time but didn't
seem to surprise any of my more-seasoned neighbors. The police just told me
not to expect to get anything back. I felt assaulted. The underwear was
perfectly normal underwear. Nothing kinky or shameful, but it was the idea of
them being touched by someone I didn't know or want touching them. I threw
them away, unused ever again.

Please continue reading
[here](http://www.groklaw.net/article.php?story=20130818120421175).

Readers may also find this interview of Lavabit founder informative -

