---
title: Rosalind Will Get Even More Marvelous
tags:
- Rosalind
categories:
- blog
---
Regular readers are familiar with Rosalind bioinformatics learning platform,
or check our earlier commentaries
[here](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/09/18/rosalind-project-at-algorithmic-
biology-laboratory-st-petersburg/) and
[here](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/11/02/on-teachinglearning-
bioinformatics-online-socraticqs-rosalind/). Nikolay Vyahhi, a creator of
Rosalind, sent us an email update on where they are going next.
<!--more-->

>

By the way, we're slowing down with the current Rosalind engine

development to create a new collaborative platform for online education,

which will include all current features and more, also it'll be scaled to

other disciplines (such as algorithms and coding for scientists). New

platform will be even more marvelous than Rosalind, so stay tuned :)

Nikolay wrote an introductory commentary for those unfamiliar with Rosalind.
User stats are phenomenal for an web service that is only few months old.

\------------------------------------------

**Rosalind - Nikolay Vyahhi**

[Rosalind](http://rosalind.info) is an online educational platform for
learning bioinformatics. It was launched in August 2012 and so far subscribed
over 4500 users. Rosalind allows learning bioinformatics concepts through
problem solving and programing. In the end of last year the platform was named
as [Best educational site of 2012](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2013/01/10/top-
bioinformatics-contributions-of-2012/) by Homologus.

![fig1](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/02/fig1-300x151.png)

Rosalind problem tree is developed in a way that concurrently builds up
biological, algorithmic, and programming knowledge. It is also possible to go
deeper into one particular area: genome assembly, sequence alignment,
computational proteomics, etc. Each attempt generates a new dataset and the
system checks results automatically. There are no restrictions on using any
particular programming language, so, basically, to join Rosalind only the
Internet connection required.

![fig2](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/02/fig2-300x151.png)

As of February 2013, the number of published problems reached 107 that have
been attempted to be solved more than 77 thousand times.

In addition to tasks, Rosalind team has created a
[glossary](http://rosalind.info/glossary/) that contains almost 500 terms, so
every problem can be associated with one or several of them.

![fig3](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/02/fig3-300x144.png)

Rosalind has its own game mechanics with various levels and badges for users
achievements that are constantly being expanded.

![fig4](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/02/fig4-300x144.png)

Rosalind is designed in a way that professors in bioinformatics can use it in
their courses to create and manage classes, check assignments automatically
and get class statistics. Rosalind also stores a list of people who teach
bioinformatics and have links to online materials on their personal web pages.

![fig5](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/02/fig5-300x144.png)

The opportunity to accept and oversee ideas proposed by users was added to
actively involve bioinformatics community into the project. Experienced users
may now take part in editing of ready-to-publish problems and suggest their
own.

Rosalind is already receiving feedback from users from around the world. By
the end of 2013 it is planned to create over 300 problems for more than 20000
active users.

Rosalind web page <http://rosalind.info>.

