---
title: Why Waste 3 Billion Dollars on Human Brain Activity Map Alchemy Project?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
The practice of alchemy had many backers during the medieval era, because
alchemists promised to turn base metals into gold and silver. Who did not want
to take a shortcut to become stinking rich? At the end, the only method to
turn lead into gold was discovered by studying a material very different from
lead or gold. During early 20th century, physicists developed quantum theory
by modeling hydrogen atom, a gas consisting of only one electron and one
proton. If funding agencies of that era restricted physicists to study only
gold, silver and platinum, we probably would not have had the periodic table,
semiconductors, electronic gadgets and Watson-Crick structure.
<!--more-->

That history did not make any impact on Francis Collins, who [continues to
propose wasting humongous sums on modern day alchemy
projects](http://incubator.rockefeller.edu/?p=730).

>

As the director of the NIH, Francis S. Collins tweeted:

> Obama mentions the [#NIH](https://twitter.com/search/%23NIH) Brain Activity
Map in [#SOTU](https://twitter.com/search/%23SOTU)

Francis S. Collins (@NIHDirector) [February 13,
2013](https://twitter.com/NIHDirector/status/301531819743006720)

The Brain Activity Map (BAM) is a project that will bring together federal
agencies, neuroscientists, and private research foundations to create a
functional map of every connection in the human brain - [numbering](http://www
.annualreviews.org/doi/abs/10.1146/annurev.ne.11.030188.002231) in hundreds of
trillions. Obama plans to spend $300 million each year on this project over
the next 10 years. The researchers and investors involved hope that BAM will
drive advances in artificial intelligence, help us understand diseases like
Alzheimers and schizophrenia, and stimulate the American economy.

Why do they propose a human map? It is because they want to take a shortcut to
where the gold is, i.e. curing human diseases. The same age-old alchemy
mentality prevails.

Five years back, we would have possibly been the lone voices in wilderness for
arguing against such humongous waste, because everyone else drank Paul Krugman
cool-aid of 'we can print infinite sums of money'. Thankfully that mentality
has changed, and other scientists like Mike Eisen and Corey Bargmann are
coming forward to explain that the wasted money would come from reduced
research budgets of other scientists. For more details on why human brain
activity map is a waste of public funds, please take a look at -

[A 3 Billion Dollar Mistake: Why the American government should think twice
about a Brain Activity Map (BAM)](http://incubator.rockefeller.edu/?p=730)

