---
title: Titus Brown's Commentary on the Cost of Open Science
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Titus Brown, a professor at MSU, is conducting a social experiment with his
bioinformatics research approach that he calls 'open science'. He [posted an
informative commentary](http://ivory.idyll.org/blog/the-cost-of-open-
science.html) about what he learned so far and his suggestions for what the
institutions should do. We agree with many things he said, and the following
commentary is only on the points we disagree with.
<!--more-->

**Disagreement 1**

Titus wrote:

>

In the specific realm of biology and software, I think there's a strong
argument to be made that the future belongs to those who try to build good
software. I hope so. But I'm getting tired of the slow pace, and I'm not sure
how to accelerate things -- discussion and ideas here. (I hope to have some
good news on this front in a few weeks, BTW.)

What he and others call 'open science' is really not science, but rather
technology development.

In the context of technology development, 'openness' was invented many
centuries ago and it was called [patent](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Patent).

> The word patent originates from the Latin patere, which means "to lay open"
(i.e., to make available for public inspection).

When an inventor is granted a patent, he tells others about his know-how and
others agree to pay him a fee for using his invention. There is always risk
that others will try to tweak his method and find a better solution. Also,
there is risk that others will get ahead lot faster by leveraging his
discovery. Everything Titus mentioned about his experience of 'openness' had
been learned by technology developers for centuries.

Companies often choose between getting a 'patent' or keeping a 'trade secret'
(closed discovery). [Here](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RC4) is a classic
example of trade secret leaking out.

>

RC4 was designed by Ron Rivest of RSA Security in 1987. While it is officially
termed "Rivest Cipher 4", the RC acronym is alternatively understood to stand
for "Ron's Code" (see also RC2, RC5 and RC6).

RC4 was initially a trade secret, but in September 1994 a description of it
was anonymously posted to the Cypherpunks mailing list. It was soon posted on
the sci.crypt newsgroup, and from there to many sites on the Internet. The
leaked code was confirmed to be genuine as its output was found to match that
of proprietary software using licensed RC4. Because the algorithm is known, it
is no longer a trade secret. The name RC4 is trademarked, so RC4 is often
referred to as ARCFOUR or ARC4 (meaning alleged RC4) to avoid trademark
problems. RSA Security has never officially released the algorithm; Rivest
has, however, linked to the English Wikipedia article on RC4 in his own course
notes.[5] RC4 has become part of some commonly used encryption protocols and
standards, including WEP and WPA for wireless cards and TLS.

Academic scholars also had a system for sharing their ideas and making sure
they were properly cited. The honor system was called 'plagiarism'. We covered
the history of plagiarism [here](http://homolog.us/Social/history-of-
plagiarism/). Plagiarism was not equivalent to copyright violation until
academics sold their research journals to commercial entities. Instead anyone,
[who did not properly cite prior
discoveries](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2013/05/06/good-riddance-death-of-
the-genome-paper/), was considered an unethical writer. Check NIH guidelines
for ethical writing and plagiarism, and you will find those rules still being
mentioned.

That system is thrown out of the window, and today scientists ('technology
developers') have to curry favors (aka 'marketing' in tech world) to get their
papers cited.

**Disagreement 2**

All that reinvention of openness wheel is fine and dandy except one problem.
Unlike patenting world supported by users of an invention paying the inventor
for his openness, the open world of Titus is sustained through government
money. Based on the blog post of Titus and few comments, a consensus needs to
be created for 'science' to gain acceptance, and 'openness' is the method for
gaining consensus.

That creates several problems for science, because major scientific
discoveries were never popular at the time of discovery. [Euler's
formula](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euler%27s_formula), described by Feynman
as "one of the most remarkable, almost astounding, formulas in all of
mathematics", was not very popular in 18th century Europe full of farmers.
Darwin's theory was not accepted for many decades. What is the guarantee that
the scientific discovery of today that people will refer to in year 2300 is
popular today.

The above paragraph is not true for technology development, and almost all
cool examples cited by readers of Dr. Brown's blog are technological
discoveries. Therefore, we believe the disagreement 1 is more important in
this context than disagreement 2.

