---
title: A Quick Update on What We are up to
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Dear Readers,
<!--more-->

Sorry for dearth of commentaries over the last week. We were terribly busy
trying to achieve the following things.

a) We like to post a longer commentary on the paper on complex knotting picked
as the [top bioinformatics innovation of the
year](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2013/01/10/top-bioinformatics-contributions-
of-2012/). We reached out to Dr. Joanna Sulkowska, the first author of the
PNAS papers and heard back from her. After finishing our own work of fully
understanding the algorithm, we plan to talk to her and post a commentary on
the mentioned research. Hopefully, you will enjoy this area of bioinformatics
far away from sequence analysis discussed in our blog. Also, there were
[criticisms from reddit bioinformatics readers](http://www.reddit.com/r/bioinf
ormatics/comments/16c6qh/top_bioinformatics_contributions_of_2012_homologus/)
on why we completely missed ENCODE, and we like to address those as well.

b) January still remains to be our [Learn How SOAPdenovo2 Works
month](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2013/01/01/january-is-our-learn-how-
soapdenovo2-works-month/), and we are working on remaining commentaries to
explain the algorithm.

c) In 2012, we published ~300 commentaries. When we tried to post a [summary
this week](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2013/01/14/homolog-us-blog-welcomes-
pagxxi-attendees/), we were completely lost. Many innovative assembly
algorithms like SPAdes, minia were initially categorized under 'de Bruijn
graph', but we feel it will help you navigate the site better, if we rebuild
the categories. That task is turning out to be more time consuming than we
expected.

d) Over the last year, we worked on assembly and analysis of a fish genome.
Now we are in the process of writing the paper, and that work is keeping us
unusually busy.

