---
title: Are You Feeling Lucky?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
NY Times blog post covers a ground-breaking scientific discovery -
<!--more-->

[Looking to Genes for the Secret to
Happiness](http://well.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/08/23/what-our-genes-reveal-
about-true-happiness/?smid=fb-nytimes&WT.z_sma=HL_WOG_20130823&_r=2&;)

> Our genes may have a more elevated moral sense than our minds do, according
to a new study of the genetic effects of happiness. They can, it seems, reward
us with healthy gene activity when were unselfish and chastise us, at a
microscopic level, when we put our own needs and desires first.

To reach that slightly unsettling conclusion, researchers from the University
of North Carolina and the University of California, Los Angeles, had 80
healthy volunteers complete an online questionnaire that asked why they felt
satisfied with their lives. Then the researchers drew their blood and analyzed
their white blood cells.

Scientists have long surmised that moods affect health. But the underlying
cellular mechanisms were murky until they began looking at gene-expression
profiles inside white blood cells. Gene expression is the complex process by
which genes direct the production of proteins. These proteins jump-start other
processes, which in the case of white blood cells control much of the bodys
immune response.

Daily Beast Tears apart another fascinating discovery by the same first
author, but she claims she did not understand the equations she published !

![](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/08/Capture22-214x300.png)

[Barbara Fredricksons Bestselling Positivity Is Trashed by a New
Study](http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2013/08/16/barbara-fredrickson-s
-bestselling-positivity-is-trashed-by-a-new-study.html)

> Fredrickson and Losada's paper was a huge hit. It became a go-to reference
in the literature on positivity and garnered almost 1,000 citations in less
than a decadethe academic equivalent of a No. 1 New York Times bestseller.
Fredrickson parlayed that success into Positivity, the 2009 mass-market book
mentioned above, which makes a big deal about the 31 ratio vindicated by
Losada's sexy math.

Except Losada's sexy math is totally incompetent.

Thats the upshot of the scathing paper by Brown, Sokal, and Friedman. Losada
had recorded the chatter of teams of business professionals collaborating on
projects, and researchers later coded the "speech acts" of team members as
either positive or negative. They also assessed the performance of those teams
along certain metrics. Putting the two together, Losada found that teams with
a 2.90131 ratio of positive to negative comments performed much better than
those with only slightly lower ratios. However, as Brown, Sokal, and Friedman
explain, Losada's data are flat out the wrong kind to plug into differential
equations, and Losada's attempt to do so produced not a breakthrough about the
nonlinear, tipping-point dynamics of positivity, but complete gibberish.

That is enough junk science within the span of 24 hours. For our previous
coverage, check -

[Tragedy of the Day: PNAS Got Duped by Positivity Lady
!!](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/08/05/tragedy-of-the-day-pnas-got-
duped-by-positivity-lady/)

\-------------------------

Thankfully the readers of New York times blog are smarter than the PNAS
reviewers. Why not put [Bruce Macevoysebastopol on the PNAS
panel](http://well.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/08/23/what-our-genes-reveal-about-
true-happiness/?comments#permid=14)?

> this is the kind of research, and report of research, that is a test of
science literacy. or, a test of whether you can resist laughing out loud at
the conclusions based on the evidence.

the combination of a small sample (n = 80), dubious assessment methods (self
report), "small minority" of eudaemonic people, and very large number of
reported correlations, are all red flags in behavioral research. when the
independent variables are genes, with unreported frequencies in the
population, the results are almost certainly fortuitous.

if not fortuitous, we still have those annoying cause and effect issues, for
example whether the genes associated with eudaemonic outlook have a direct
influence (almost certainly impossible), an indirect influence (via
inflammation related health problems) or a very indirect influence (via
education or income attained by people with less health risk).

with all that, to say that "genes can tell the difference" is patent nonsense.
"tell the difference" is a predictive claim. let dr. cole take a large random
sample, run his predictive gene analysis, identify who will be eudaemonic, and
verify that selection.

to claim that genes are "working for the common good" is so far outside
established evolutionary theory as to be superstition.

