---
title: '"Genome Patent Fights Erupts"'
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Here is [An old and forgotten story from
1991](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/254/5029/184). This is possibly from
where the idea of patenting BRCA1 and BRCA2 cancer genes came from.
<!--more-->

> AT A CONGRESSIONAL BRIEFING ON THE Human Genome Project last summer,
molecular biologist Craig Venter of the National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke dropped a bombshell whose repercussions are still
reverberating throughout the genome community. While describing his new
project to sequence partially every gene active in the human brain, Venter
casually mentioned that his employer, the National Institutes of Health, was
planning to file patent applications on 1000 of these sequences a month.

"I almost fell off my chair," says one briefing participant who asked not to
be named. James Watson, who directs the genome project at NIH, did more than
that, exploding and denouncing the plan as "sheer lunacy." With the advent of
automated sequencing machines, "virtually any monkey" can do what Venter's
group is doing, said Watson, who in one sentence managed to insult Venter, his
dismayed postdocs, and Reid Adler, the director of NIH's Office of Technology
Transfer, who advised Venter to pursue the patents. "What is important is
interpreting the sequence," insisted Watson. If these random bits of sequences
can be patented, he said, "I am horrified."

Watson may have been the most outspoken, but he was not the only one to be
horrified. The scheme has engendered a firestorm of criticism from genome
scientists and project officials alike, including David Galas, Watson's
counterpart who oversees the genome effort at the Department of Energy (DOE),
which will begin funding some of Venter's work in November; Stanford's David
Botstein, a prominent genome project researcher; and Walter Bodmer of the
Imperial Cancer Research Fund, who is also president of the International
Human Genome Organization in London. The critics argue that these sequences
probably can't be patented in the first place--and even if they can, they
shouldn't be.

What galls Watson and the other critics the most is the notion that by simply
sequencing a short piece of an unidentified clone with an automated sequencing
machine--"a dumb, repetitive task," as one critic describes it--someone could
conceivably lay claim to most of the human genes. This, they say, would
undercut patent protection for those who labor long and hard at the real task
of elucidating the function of the proteins encoded by the genes, thereby
driving industry away.

