---
title: Genome of Western Painted Turtle
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Another interesting genome paper came out in Genome Biology.
<!--more-->

[The western painted turtle genome, a model for the evolution of extreme
physiological adaptations in a slowly evolving
lineage](http://genomebiology.com/2013/14/3/R28/abstract)

>

Background: We describe the genome of the western painted turtle, Chrysemys
picta bellii, one of the most widespread, abundant and well-studied turtles.
We place the genome into a comparative evolutionary context, and focus on
genomic features associated with tooth loss, immune function, longevity, sex
differentiation and determination, and the species' physiological capacities
to withstand extreme anoxia and tissue freezing.

Results: Our phylogenetic analyses confirm that turtles are the sister group
to living archosaurs, and demonstrate an extraordinarily slow rate of sequence
evolution in the painted turtle. The ability of the painted turtle to
withstand complete anoxia and partial freezing appears to be associated with
common vertebrate gene networks, and we identify candidate genes for future
functional analyses. Tooth loss shares a common pattern of pseudogenization
and degradation of tooth-specific genes with birds, although the rate of
accumulation of mutations is much slower in the painted turtle. Genes
associated with sex differentiation generally reflect phylogeny rather than
convergence in sex determination functionality. Among gene families that
demonstrate exceptional expansions or show signatures of strong natural
selection, immune function and musculoskeletal patterning genes are
consistently overrepresented.

To get an idea about how long it takes between proposal and final publication,
this genome sequencing was recommended along with _Latimeria chalumnae_
('living fossil') genome in 2006 under 'evolution of human proteome' theme.
[This 2006 white paper at NCBI](http://www.genome.gov/Pages/Research/Sequencin
g/SeqProposals/EvolutionOfProteome.pdf) presents the big picture on their
biological significance.

Based on whatever evidence we found from web, the turtle genome was sequenced
around 2009-2010 using Sanger+NGS. We asked the authors on the total cost of
sequencing so that our readers get an idea about how dramatic the recent drop
in cost of genome sequencing/assembly had been, but did not receive any reply
yet. We also noticed that the authors did very comprehensive work on genome
analysis, and were surprised that the paper got published in Genome Biology
unlike many other comparable genome papers published over the last few months.
However, speaking of directly comparable papers, Genome Biology also [covered
alligator genome paper](http://genomebiology.com/content/13/1/415) last year.

