---
title: "'Baffling' New Hominim Found in Sima de los Huesos, Spain"
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
![ALeqM5jSL4O_aOHOcCTpf46Ik_ysM9mOSA](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/12/ALeqM5jSL4O_aOHOcCTpf46Ik_ysM9mOSA.jpg)
<!--more-->

(source of figure: [AFP/File, Cesar Manso](http://www.google.com/hostednews/af
p/slideshow/ALeqM5iTDo8fnXmbjNjxCO9hi7BcQ9UfAA?docId=b097d434-2c1b-
498e-9182-ef1a3734e207&hl=en&index=0))

Another day, another picture of people digging under cave, another 'incredible
breakthrough', another sex story !! After Denisovans and extremely ancient
African (discussed in [Denisovans, Extremely Ancient Africans the Role Cheap
Sequencing Plays in Rewriting Human
History](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/11/25/denisovans-extremely-
ancient-africans-role-cheap-sequencing-plays-rewriting-human-history/)) comes
today's 'baffling finding' that pushes the record by four times.

> Using a thigh bone from the cave, Matthias Meyer from the Max Planck
Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology has sequenced the almost complete
mitochondrial genome of one of Sima de los Huesos inhabitants, who likely
lived around 400,000 years ago. That is at least four times older than the
previous record-holdera small 100,000-year-old stretch of Neanderthal DNA.

Discovery channel pushes the sex angle. Sex sells, even in next-gen
sequencing.

[Ancient Humans Had Sex with Mystery
Relatives](http://news.discovery.com/human/evolution/ancient-humans-had-sex-
with-mystery-relatives-131203.htm)

They even go to the extent of concocting an amorous image.

![](http://static.ddmcdn.com/gif/neanderthal-human-660.jpg)

Sci-news reports that the 'genome is sequenced', even though it is not.

[Sima de los Huesos: Scientists Sequence Genome of Enigmatic
Hominin](http://www.sci-news.com/othersciences/anthropology/science-sima-de-
los-huesos-hominins-genome-01596.html)

Truth: Nuclear genome is very unlikely to get sequenced according to the
authors. Even the mitochondrial sequence was full of contamination.

Nature sells you the paper for $32 (or $199, if you are wealthy).

[A Mitochondrial Genome Sequence of a Hominin from Sima de los Huesos](http://
www.nature.com/nature/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/nature12788.html)

> Excavations of a complex of caves in the Sierra de Atapuerca in northern
Spain have unearthed hominin fossils that range in age from the early
Pleistocene to the Holocene1. One of these sites, the Sima de los Huesos (pit
of bones), has yielded the worlds largest assemblage of Middle Pleistocene
hominin fossils2, 3, consisting of at least 28 individuals4 dated to over
300,000 years ago5. The skeletal remains share a number of morphological
features with fossils classified as Homo heidelbergensis and also display
distinct Neanderthal-derived traits6, 7, 8. Here we determine an almost
complete mitochondrial genome sequence of a hominin from Sima de los Huesos
and show that it is closely related to the lineage leading to mitochondrial
genomes of Denisovans9, 10, an eastern Eurasian sister group to Neanderthals.
Our results pave the way for DNA research on hominins from the Middle
Pleistocene.

Only Dan Graur ([@dangraur](https://twitter.com/DanGraur)) gives you what
matters -

i) [the full paper](http://twileshare.com/bhfi)

and

ii) Healthy dose of skepticism.

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/12/Capture1-300x56.png)

