---
title: Changing Dynamics of the Sequencing World
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
This comes on the heels of [Roche-PacBio deal announced
recently](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/09/22/end-short-read-era-part-
ii/). Also, shutdown here means real shutdown, [not the phony government
one](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/10/14/us-science-funding-let-us/).
<!--more-->

[Roche Shutting Down 454 Sequencing
Business](http://www.genomeweb.com/sequencing/roche-shutting-down-454
-sequencing-business)

> NEW YORK (GenomeWeb News) Roche is shuttering its 454 Life Sciences
sequencing operations and laying off about 100 employees, the company
confirmed today.

The 454 sequencers will be phased out in mid-2016, and the 454 facility in
Branford, Conn., will be closed "accordingly," Roche said in a statement
e-mailed to GenomeWeb Daily News.

The 100 layoffs will take place during the next three years, and, "Roche is
committed to finding socially responsible solutions for the employees affected
by these changes," it added.

Until the business is shut down, Roche will provide service and support to 454
instruments, parts, reagents, and consumables.

What could possibly be going on? Apart from the obvious competition issues,
here is one possibility. In 2009, governments around the world created huge
stimulus budgets and universities/research centers bought sequencing machines
like candies. Roche/454 was ready with a machine at that time and saw huge
demand. However, that demand was artificially induced, but the companies
possibly thought that it was real market-driven need for their technologies.
Now that the stimulus is gone, nobody has large capital left to buy expensive
instruments, and the laggard in competition are facing pressure to cut losses
and quit.

If that theory is right, the supposed leaders will see an impact sooner or
later. It is the dark side of artificial, government induced boom-bust economy
sold by snake-oil salesmen (aka economists).

\-------------------------------------------------------

[Illumina Licenses Nanopore Technology from UAB-
UW](http://www.nanowerk.com/news2/newsid=32744.php)

> Nanowerk News) The University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) today announced
that Illumina Inc. has licensed the rights to a DNA sequencing technology
developed by a UAB microbiologist and a University of Washington physicist.

The patent-licensing deal revolves around nanopores first studied as potential
chinks in the armor of the tuberculosis bacteria, but now part of efforts to
make sequencing even faster and cheaper.

Sequencing reveals genetic variations, which partly determine each persons
risk for many diseases as well as which drugs will work for him or her. Cancer
centers are already sequencing tumors in search of variations that make some
resistant to chemotherapy. Global sequencing studies seek to find the genetic
contributors to conditions such as autism and diabetes.

The original paper related to the above deal was published in Nature Biotech
last year.

[Reading DNA at single-nucleotide resolution with a mutant MspA nanopore and
phi29 DNA
polymerase](http://www.nature.com/nbt/journal/v30/n4/full/nbt.2171.html)

> Nanopore technologies are being developed for fast and direct sequencing of
single DNA molecules through detection of ionic current modulations as DNA
passes through a pore's constriction1, 2. Here we demonstrate the ability to
resolve changes in current that correspond to a known DNA sequence by
combining the high sensitivity of a mutated form of the protein pore
Mycobacterium smegmatis porin A (MspA)3 with phi29 DNA polymerase (DNAP)4,
which controls the rate of DNA translocation through the pore. As phi29 DNAP
synthesizes DNA and functions like a motor to pull a single-stranded template
through MspA, we observe well-resolved and reproducible ionic current levels
with median durations of ~28 ms and ionic current differences of up to 40 pA.
Using six different DNA sequences with readable regions 4253 nucleotides long,
we record current traces that map to the known DNA sequences. With single-
nucleotide resolution and DNA translocation control, this system integrates
solutions to two long-standing hurdles to nanopore sequencing.

\---------------------------------------------------------

**Analysis of PacBio Stock**

The following note is for entertainment purposes only and not an investment
advice.

PacBio stock recently went up on high volume and then the subsequent drop was
on low volume. That means the insiders are expecting more good news than bad
news from the company.

![Capture0](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/10/Capture0-300x150.png)

How far can the stock go? Often air-pockets get filled on good news and PacBio
stock does appear to have such an air-pocket. We have no clue what the good
news can be (maybe end of 'shutdown' :)), but insiders surely seem to know.

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/10/Capture14-300x180.png)

**Illumina**

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/10/Capture16-300x57.png)

