---
title: Possibly the Best Book on Personal Genomics and Personalized Medicine
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
We usually stay away from discussing the hottest topic in biomedical world
today, because we are both optimist and pessimist on personalized medicine
(explained [here](http://homolog.us/Social/vaccination-antibiotics-and-
genomic-medicine/) and [here](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/10/13/a
-question-from-reader-on-studying-bioinformatics/)). Expressing that kind of
nuanced view takes far more space than one or two blog commentaries.
<!--more-->

Thankfully, we are spared from the herculean task of writing a book, because a
far more knowledgeable scientist took on the task and delivered masterfully.
Hamid Bolouri's book titled [Personal Genomics and Personalized Medicine
(2009)](http://www.amazon.com/Personal-Genomics-Personalized-Medicine-
Bolouri/dp/1848165641) is a must read for anyone interested in learning about
the topic. Dr. Bolouri is an expert and believer in genomics revolution, yet
he presents his material without hype.

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/02/Capture3-150x150.png)

**Who is Hamid Bolouri?**

Dr. Bolouri [pioneered gene network
analysis](http://www.its.caltech.edu/~bi8/Lectures/yuh-bolouri-
davidson_1896.full.pdf) along with professor Eric Davidson and his post-doc
Cathy (Chiou-Hwa) Yuh. The Caltech group has always been at least 5-10 years
ahead of other researchers working in the same area, and you see reflections
of similar forward thinking in Dr. Bolouri's book on personalized medicine.
After Caltech, Dr. Bolouri led the computational team at Leroy Hood's
[Institute for Systems Biology](https://www.systemsbiology.org/). Currently,
he works on figuring out gene regulatory interactions in cancer cells at [Fred
Hutchinson Cancer research center](http://labs.fhcrc.org/bolouri/).

**Personalized Medicine - Vision for the Future**

We know how the pharmaceutical industry works at present. At first, they
identify few [small organic compounds](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Celecoxib)
targeted toward a well-studied disease pathway. Teams of chemists develop
other compounds of similar structures, and make tests on model organisms to
study their efficacy in curing the disease and potential harmful side effects.
If the results of those tests are satisfactory, the drug is clinically tested
on human patients leading toward its FDA approval. The entire process from
lead generation to final FDA approval is very expensive, and costs around 1
billion dollars for every approved drug.

Does that imply that 1 billion dollars will have to be spent on each drug for
each individual in the era of personalized medicine? That is certainly not
viable. Dr. Bolouri's analogy with clothing provides better analogy to how the
future is expected to unfold.

>

Instead of grouping patients in terms of gross symptoms, improved diagnostic
technologies allow us to characterize each patients specific condition in
terms of particular combinations of dysregulated pathways. Tailored
combinations of pathway-specific drugs can then provide highly personalized
prescriptions. Viewed in this light, drugs and other medical interventions may
be likened to clothing: we all wear some clothing, but we mix and match
clothing items to suit our different body types and lifestyles/environments.

**What we like about the book**

However, reaching that world of tailored medicine is not easy, and Dr.
Bolouri's book explains what the challenges are. Here is what we like about
"Personal Genomics and Personalized Medicine" -

1\. Reaching the world of personalized medicine from where we are today will
not only need scientific breakthroughs, but will also require many radical
social transformations. The book covers every aspect of such change including
translating scientific discoveries to clinical practices, economic factors,
legal challenges and ethical issues.

2\. All scientific and non-scientific contents of the book are well
researched, well thought-out and incredibly thorough. Even though the author
anticipates a revolution in genomic medicine and compares it with revolution
in computing that started 30-40 years back, he does not show unbridled
enthusiasm and does not try to 'sell' his enthusiasm. Rather every opinion in
the book is objective, balanced and supported by data.

3\. This book will not get obsolete in 2018 even though the topic it covers
has been changing very rapidly. Guess what, it came out 4 years back and still
feels like it is way into future.

(Note. Dr. Bolouri emailed us with this correction - "You must be thinking of
my 2008 GRN modeling modeling book. The Personalized Medicine Book came out at
the end of 2010.")

**Who should read**

It is recommended for anyone, who wants to understand the ongoing
transformation in medicine and participate in it. Chapters 3-5 goes into
technical details of genomics that geneticists will gain the most from, but
given that the revolution in personalized medicine is based on genome
sequences, we do not see another way of presenting the material that avoids
gene interactions. The author includes an introductory chapter on gene
interactions (chapter 2) to help non-geneticist readers follow the remaining
text easily. Bioinformaticians and computational biologists should gain a lot
from this book, because the author is a computational biologist himself.

**What we do not like**

1\. **Price**: [Paperback edition of the book sold out](http://www.amazon.com
/Personal-Genomics-Personalized-Medicine-
Bolouri/dp/184816565X/ref=reader_auth_dp) and the hard-cover edition is
expensive for many of our readers.

2\. **Availability**: We do not know, why the libraries around here did not
pick up such an excellent book. We looked around our neighborhood full of
universities, but [nearest copy we could
locate](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vancouver) needed a passport and
harassment from homeland security.

