---
title: Surprise of the Day - Zebrafish Genome 'Published'
tags:
- move
categories:
- blog
---
Zebrafish is an important model organism to study vertebrate development. Ask
a geneticist whether zebrafish genome was published before or after human
genome and most will hesitantly say 'after'. If you ask how many years after,
we doubt anyone will give a number greater than 4. The genome had been
publicly available for so long that most researchers do not know that it was
not backed by an 'official genome paper'.
<!--more-->

That status finally changes today, not sure whether due to BGI competition.

[The Zebrafish Reference Genome Sequence and its Relationship to the Human Gen
ome](http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/nature12111.html)

> Zebrafish have become a popular organism for the study of vertebrate gene
function1, 2. The virtually transparent embryos of this species, and the
ability to accelerate genetic studies by gene knockdown or overexpression,
have led to the widespread use of zebrafish in the detailed investigation of
vertebrate gene function and increasingly, the study of human genetic
disease3, 4, 5. However, for effective modelling of human genetic disease it
is important to understand the extent to which zebrafish genes and gene
structures are related to orthologous human genes. To examine this, we
generated a high-quality sequence assembly of the zebrafish genome, made up of
an overlapping set of completely sequenced large-insert clones that were
ordered and oriented using a high-resolution high-density meiotic map.
Detailed automatic and manual annotation provides evidence of more than 26,000
protein-coding genes6, the largest gene set of any vertebrate so far
sequenced. Comparison to the human reference genome shows that approximately
70% of human genes have at least one obvious zebrafish orthologue. In
addition, the high quality of this genome assembly provides a clearer
understanding of key genomic features such as a unique repeat content, a
scarcity of pseudogenes, an enrichment of zebrafish-specific genes on
chromosome 4 and chromosomal regions that influence sex determination.

