---
title: 'Open Access: Can Humans Survive on Planet Earth?'
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Year 2003 was really the Jurassic age of publishing, because ipads did not
arrive and researchers preferred to go to libraries for no reason other than
failure of Windows to reliably open pdf files. Here is [an old commentary
published in Nature in
2003](http://www.nature.com/nature/focus/accessdebate/14.html) arguing about
why open-access cannot survive.
<!--more-->

>

However, the main problem with maintaining a free online model is that it adds
to the expenses of the journal, which are considerable for the JCI. In 2003,
the total cost of publication was about $2,580,000. Producing, manufacturing
and distributing the printed version are a significant, but not the biggest,
part of that cost. Other expenses comprise, in descending order: staff
salaries and benefits; compensation to members of the editorial board;
delivery and hosting of the online journal; and general and administrative
costs, such as travel and rental of office space.

The JCI of course generates revenue, and even a modest surplus. In 2003, the
journal earned around $2,840,000 in revenue. Print subscriptions accounted for
more than $1.5 million of the total; submission and publication fees, the next
largest revenue block, were a little more than $950,000. The remainder came
from reprints and royalties.

With the online version free, the fall in subscriptions to the print edition
is, not surprisingly, a concern. I believe, however, that there is little most
publishers can do about the long-term decline of institutional
subscribers,such as libraries, the revenue from which constitutes most of
total subscription income. In 1993, JCI fulfilled almost 3,600 institutional
subscriptions, but by 2003 this number had fallen to 2,001 (Figure 1). The
journal competes with others for a portion of already tight -- and tightening
-- library budgets, and it competes with itself by offering, for free, not
only a replica of its printed version online, but a version rich with
capability for multimedia supplements, interlinking and interoperability.

Nature sticks to its guns and continues to charge authors, libraries and
online readers premium prices to view the products of research paid by
government grants and reviewed by another group of researchers for free in
their spare time.

Is the business model sustainable?

