---
title: WTF? Illumina Wants to Patent All Online Bioinformatics Programs !!
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Readers may find the following patent application interesting (h/t:
@genetics_blog).
<!--more-->

[Cloud computing environment for biological
data](https://www.google.com/patents/US20130275486)

Someone should tell the Illumina's IP lawyers that 'cloud computing' is a
buzzword to describe the internet. What next? The Onion patenting a method to
crack jokes online? Dilbert creator Scott Adams patenting cartoons on silly
patent applications and other corporate management decisions? 23 and Me
patenting human genetics? (Please note that the [last one is a real
patent](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/06/21/forget-gene-patents-co-
founder-of-23andme-patents-personalized-genomics/)).

Details of Illumina patent application follow.

![](https://patentimages.storage.googleapis.com/US20130275486A1/US20130275486A
1-20131017-D00000.png)

>

CLAIMS(20)

1\. A system for analyzing biological samples, comprising:

a cloud computing environment in communication with a plurality of sequencing
devices, wherein the cloud computing environment comprises at least one
server, the server being configured to communicate with a sequencing system
remote from the server to receive and store sequence data from the sequencing
system while the sequence data is being generated.

2\. The system of claim 1, comprising a sequencing module configured to
generate the sequence data and a communications module configured to
communicate the sequence data to the server.

3\. The system of claim 1, wherein the communications module is configured to
receive a user instruction related to communicating the sequence data to the
cloud computing environment, and wherein a default state of the communications
module is to communicate the sequence data to the cloud computing environment
in an absence of the user instruction.

4\. The system of claim 1, wherein the sequence data comprises data derived
from fluorescence intensities.

5\. The system of claim 1, wherein the sequence data comprises data derived
from base identities of a plurality of nucleotide strands.

6\. The system of claim 1, wherein the cloud computing environment comprises
at least one processor configured to:

receive the sequence data; and

assemble at least a portion of a genome based on the sequence data.

7\. The system of claim 1, wherein the communications module is configured to
communicate a user instruction related to analysis of the sequence data using
the cloud computing environment, and wherein the sequence data is analyzed by
the cloud computing environment based on the user instruction without further
instructions by the user.

8\. The system of claim 1, wherein the cloud computing environment comprises
at least one processor configured to:

receive one or more instructions related to sharing the sequence data from an
originator of the sequence data.

9\. The system of claim 8, wherein the cloud computing environment comprises
at least one processor configured to:

receive a request from a secondary user related to the sequence data;

authenticate the secondary user based on instructions provided by the
originator of the sequence data; and

provide the sequence data to the secondary user if the secondary user has
permission to access the sequence data.

10\. The system of claim 1, wherein the sequence data is stored on the cloud
computing environment.

11\. The system of claim 1, wherein the sequence data is not stored on the
sequencing device after a sequencing run is complete.

12\. The system of claim 1, wherein the communications module is configured to
distribute the sequence data to a plurality of computer systems connected to
the communications module for analysis of the sequence data.

13\. The system of claim 12, wherein the cloud based network is configured to
determine processing capabilities of computers of the plurality of computer
systems, and to distribute the sequence data for analysis based upon the
determination.

14\. A computer implemented method for analyzing sequence data in a cloud
computing environment, comprising:

receiving, at a server, a request from a user to annotate sequence data stored
on a cloud computing environment;

determining if the user has permission to annotate the sequence data;

modifying the sequence data based on an instruction related to an annotation
if the user has permission to annotate the sequence data; and

storing the sequence data with the annotation.

15\. The method of claim 14, wherein the annotation comprises information
about the user.

16\. The method of claim 14, comprising receiving a request from a secondary
user to rate the annotation; and storing a rating of the annotation with the
sequence data.

17\. The method of claim 16, comprising determining a quality of the
annotation based on one or more ratings and removing the annotation if the
quality of the annotation is below a threshold.

18\. The method of claim 14, wherein determining if the user has permission to
annotate the sequence data comprises determining if the user is an owner of
the sequence data.

19\. The method of claim 14, wherein the annotation is visible only to
secondary users that have permission to view the sequence data.

20\. A system for analyzing biological samples, comprising:

at least one networked computer system configured to:

receive sequence data from a remote sequencing device, wherein the sequence
data comprises permissions for accessing the sequence data;

receive a request from a secondary user to access the sequence data, the
secondary user being different from the remote sequencing device; and

allowing the secondary user access to the sequence data if the secondary user
is authorized under the permissions.

We still believe Illumina will be better served by firing most of its IP
lawyers and tripling the salary of Anthony Cox and alike.

Readers may find these related commentaries useful:

[Academic Bioinformaticians Uncomfortable with Illuminas Publication of
Variant Caller](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/06/05/academic-
bioinformaticians-uncomfortable-with-illuminas-publication-of-variant-caller/)

[Bioinformatics Patents on Burrows Wheeler
Transform](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/07/20/bioinformatics-patents-
on-burrows-wheeler-transform/)

