---
title: The Rise and Fall of Human Genetics and the Common Variant - Common Disease
  Hypothesis
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Orli Bahcall (@obahcall), who is a Senior Editor of Nature Genetics, posted
the following chart on success of GWAS. Nature Genetics is a 'high-impact'
vanity journal, which should be renamed Nature GWAS for their recent focus.
<!--more-->

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/12/Capture4-300x198.png)

Joe Terwilliger, a colorful person (more on that later), wrote the following
text in 2008 on his now defunct blog. We are yet to get his permission. So, if
the text disappears, please check
[here](http://ecodevoevo.blogspot.com/2013/12/sometime-geneticist-joe-
terwilliger-on.html#comment-form).

>

The Rise and Fall of Human Genetics and the Common Variant - Common Disease
Hypothesis

By Joe Terwilliger

Nov 2008

There is an enormity of positive press coverage for the Human Genome Project
and its successor, the HapMap Project, even though within the field the
initial euphoric party when the first results came out has already done a full
180 to be replaced by the hangover that inevitably follows such excesses.

For those of you not familiar with the history of this field and the
controversies about its prognosis which were present from the outset, I refer
you to a review paper I and a colleague wrote back in 2000 at the height of
the controversy - Nature Genetics 26, 151 - 157 . The basic gist of the
argument put forward for the HapMap project was the so-called common
variant/common disease hypothesis (CV/CD) which proposed that "most of the
genetic risk for common, complex diseases is due to disease loci where there
is one common variant (or a small number of them)" [Hum Molec Genet
11:2417-23]. Under those circumstances it was widely argued that using the
technologies being developed for the HapMap project, that one would be able to
identify these genes using "genome-wide association studies" (GWAS), basically
by scoring the genotype for each individual in a cross sectional study for
each of 500,000 to 1,000,000 individual marker loci - the argument being that
if common variants explained a large fraction of the attributable risk for a
given disease, that one could identify them by comparing allele frequencies at
nearby common variants in affected vs unaffected individuals. This point was
contested by researchers only with regard to how many markers you might have
to study for this to work if that model of the true state of nature applied.
Many overly optimistic scientists initially proposed 30,000 such loci would be
sufficient, and when Kruglyak suggested it might take 500,000 such markers
people attacked his models, yet today the current technological platforms use
1,000,000 and more markers, with products in the pipelines to increase this
even more, because it quickly became clear that the earlier models of regular
and predictable levels of linkage disequiblrium were not realistic, something
that should have been clear from even the most basic understanding of
population genetics, or even empirical data from lower organisms.

Today such studies are widespread, having been conducted for virtually every
disease under the sun, and yet the number of common variants with appreciable
attributable fractions that have been identified is miniscule. Scientists have
trumpetted such results as have been found for Crohn's disease, in which 32
genes were detected using panels of thousands of individuals genotyped at
hundreds of thousands of markers - this sounds great until you start looking
at the fine print, in which it is pointed out that all of these loci put
together explain less than 10% of the attributable risk of disease, and for
various well-known statistical reasons, this is a gross overestimate of the
actual percentage of the variance explained. Most of these loci individually
explain far less than half a percent of the risk, meaning that while this may
be biologically interesting, it has no impact at all on public health as most
of the risk remains unexplained. This is completely opposite to the CV/CD
theory proposed as defined above. In fact, this is about the best case for any
complex trait studied, with virtually every example dataset I have personally
looked at there is absolutely nothing discovered at all.

At the beginning of the euphoria for such association studies, the example
"poster child" used to justify the proposal was the relationship between
variation at the ApoE gene and risk of Alzheimer disease. In an impressively
gutsy paper recently, a GWAS study was performed in Alzheimer disease and
published as an important result, with a title that sent me rolling on the
floor in tears laughing: "A high-density whole-genome association study
reveals that APOE is the major susceptibility gene for sporadic late-onset
Alzheimer's disease" [ J Clin Psychiatry. 2007 Apr;68(4):613-8 ] - in an
amazingly negative study they did not even have the expected number of false
positive findings - just ApoE and absolutely nothing else... And the authors
went on to describe how important this result was and claimed this means they
need more money to do bigger studies to find the rest of the genes. Has anyone
ever heard of stopping rules, that maybe there aren't any common variants of
high attributable fraction??? This was a claim that Ken Weiss and I put
forward many times over the past 15 years, and Ken has been making this point
for a decade before that even, in his book, "Genetic variation and human
disease", which anyone working in this field should read if they are not
familiar with the basic evolutionary theory and empirical data which show why
noone should ever have expected the CV/CD hypothesis to hold...

In many other fields, the studies that have been done at enormous expense have
found absolutely nothing, and in what Ken Weiss calls a form of Western Zen
(in which no means yes), the failure of one's research to find anything means
they should get more money to do bigger studies, since obviously there are
things to find but they did not have big enough studies with enough patients
or enough markers - it could not possibly be that their hypotheses are wrong,
and should be rejected... It is a truly bizarre world where failure is
rewarded with more money - but when it comes to promising upper-middle-aged
men (i.e. Congress) that they might not die if they fund our projects, they
are happy to invest in things that have pretty much now been proven not to
work...

While in a truly bizarre propaganda piece, Francis Collins, in a parting
sycophantic commentary (J Clin Invest. 2008 May;118(5):1590-605) claimed that
the controversy about the CV/CD hypothesis was "... ultimately resolved by the
remarkable success of the genetic association studies enabled by the HapMap
project." He went on to list a massive table of "successful" studies,
including loci for such traits as bipolar, Parkinson disease and
schizophrenia, and of course the laughable success of ApoE and Alzheimer
disease. To be objective about these claims, let me quote from what
researchers studying those diseases had to say.

Parkinson disease: "Taken together, studies appear to provide substantial
evidence that none of the SNPs originally featured as PD loci (sic from GWAS
studies) are convincingly replicated and that all may be false positives...it
is worth examining the implications for GWAS in general." Am J Hum Genet
78:1081-82

Schizophrenia: "...data do not provide evidence for involvement of any genomic
region with schizophrenia detectable with moderate [sic 1500 people!] sample
size" Mol Psych 13:570-84

Bipolar AND Schizophrenia: "There has been great anticipation in the world of
psychaitric research over the past year, with the community awaiting the
results of a number of GWAS's... Similar pictures emerged for both disorders -
no strong replications across studies, no candidates with strong effect on
disease risk, and no clear replications of genes implicated by candidate gene
studies." - Report of the World Congress of Psychiatric Genetics.

Ischaemic stroke: "We produced more than 200 million genotypes...Preliminary
analysis of these data did not reveal any single locus conferring a large
effect on risk for ischaemic stroke." Lancet Neurol. 2007 May;6(5):383-4.

And the list goes on and on of traits for which nothing was found, with the
authors concluding they need more money for bigger studies with more markers.
It is really scary that people are never willing to let go of hypotheses that
did not pan out. Clearly CV/CD is not a reasonable model for complex traits.
Even the diseases where they claim enormous success are not fitting with the
model - they get very small p-values for associations that confer relative
risks of 1.03 or so - not "the majority of the risk" as the CV/CD hypothesis
proposed.

One must recall that in the intial paper proposing GWAS by Risch and
Merikangas (Science 1996 Sep 13;273(5281):1516-7) - a paper which,
incidentally, pointed out that one always has more power for such studies when
collecting families rather than unrelated individuals - the authors stated
that "despite the small magnitude of such (sic: common variants in)genes, the
magnitude of their attributable risk (the proportion of people affected due to
them) may be large because they are quite frequent in the population (sic:
meaning >>10% in their models), making them of public health significance."
The obvious corollary of this is that if they are not quite frequency, they
are NOT having high attributable fraction and are therefore NOT of public
health significance.

And yet, you still have scientists claiming that the results of these studies
will lead to a scenario in which "we will say to you, 'suppose you have a 65%
chance of getting prostate cancer when you're 65. If you start taking these
pills when you're 45, that percent will change to 2". Amazing claims when the
empirical evidence is clear that the majority of the risk of the majority of
complex diseases is not explained by anything common across ethnicities, or
common in populations... (Leroy Hood, quoted in the Seattle Post-
Intelligencer). Francis Collins recently claimed that by 2020, "new gene-based
designer drugs will be developed for ... ALzheimer disease, schizophrenia and
many other conditions", and by 2010, "predictive genetic tests will be
available for as many as a dozen common conditions". This does not jibe with
the empirical evidence... In Breast Cancer for example, researchers claimed
that knowledge of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes (which confer enormously high risk
of breast cancer to carriers) was uninteresting as it had such a small
attributable fraction in the population. Of course now they have performed
GWAS studies and examined tens of thousands of individuals and have identified
several additional loci which put together have a much smaller attributable
fraction than BRCA1 and BRCA2, yet they claim this proves how important GWAS
is. Interesting how the arguments change to fit the data, and everything is
made to sound as if it were consistent with the theory.

I suggest that people go back and read "How many diseases does it take to map
a gene with SNPs?" (2000) 26, 151 - 157. There are virtually no arguments we
made in that controversial commentary 8 years ago which we could not make even
stronger today, as the empirical data which has come up since then basically
supports our theory almost perfectly, and refutes conclusively the CV/CD
hypothesis, despite Francis Collins' rather odd claims to the contrary...

In the end, these projects will likely continue to be funded for another 5 or
10 years before people start realizing the boy has been crying wolf for a
damned long time... This is a real problem for science in America, however, as
NIH is spending big money on these rather non-scientific technologically-
driven hypothesis-free projects at the expense of investigator-initiated
hypothesis-driven science. Even more tragically training grants are enormously
plentiful meaning that we are training an enormous number of students and
postdocs in a field for which there will never be job opportunities for them,
even if things are successful. Hypothesis-free science should never be allowed
to result in Ph.D. degrees if one believes that science is about questioning
what truth is and asking questions about nature, while engineering is about
how to accomplish a definable task (like sequencing the genome quickly and
cheaply). The mythological "financial crisis" at NIH is really more a function
of the enormous amounts of money going into projects that are predetermined to
be funded by political appointees and government bureaucrats rather than the
marketplace of ideas through investigator-initiated proposals. Enormous
amounts of government funding into small numbers of projects is a bad idea -
one which began with Eric Lander's group at MIT proposing to build large
factories for the sequencing of the genome rather than spreading it across
sites, with the goal of getting it done faster (an engineering goal) instead
of getting more sites involved so that perhaps better scientific research
could have come along the way. This has led to a scenario years later in which
the factories now want to do science and not just engineering, which is
totally contrary to their raison d'etre, and leads to further concentrations
of funding in small numbers of hands when science is better served, perhaps by
a larger number of groups receiving a smaller amount of money so that more
brains are working in different directions thinking of novel and innovative
ideas not reliant on pure throughput. Human genetics has transformed from a
field with low funding, driven by creative thinking into a field driven by big
money and sheep following whatever shepherd du jour is telling them they
should do (i.e. innovative means doing what they current trend is rather than
something truly original and creative). This is bad for science, and also is
bad science. GWAS has been successful technologically, and it has resoundingly
rejected the CV/CD hypothesis through empirical data. If we accept this and
move on, we can put the HapMap and HGP where it belongs, in the same
scientific fate as the Supercollider, and let us get back to thinking instead
of throwing money at problems that are fundamentally biological and not
technological!

(most notably in terms of the big money NIH is sending into these non-
scientific technologically-driven hypothesis-free studies, rather than
investigator initiated hypothesis-driven science - one of the main causes of
the "funding crisis" at NIH where a tiny portion of new grants are funded -
get rid of the big science that is not working - like the supercollider! - and
there is no funding crisis)

Joe Terwilliger's description of the success of GWAS seems more appropriate
than Orli Bahcall's, but you may say - his blog is defunct, and Nature
Genetics is among the most cited journal in the world. There goes your 'impact
factor'. Irony of all ironies - Joe Terwilliger and Ken Weiss warned about the
same problems in the pages of nowhere other than [Nature Genetics, as early as
2000](http://www.nature.com/ng/journal/v26/n2/abs/ng1000_151.html) !!!

When Dr. Terwilliger is not working on genomes, he plays tuba, [goes to North
Korea as the Korean translator of Dennis
Rodman](http://ecodevoevo.blogspot.com/2013/09/genetics-invades-north-
korea.html) or stands [on his balcony being dressed as Abe Lincoln every
February](http://ecodevoevo.blogspot.com/2013/12/sometime-geneticist-joe-
terwilliger-on.html).

![](http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-oJ-UhtgfGdM/UiXNZeOxMWI/AAAAAAAAAYU/ThyN-
DENu5g/s320/ALeqM5iUME9GNqTW_qRYygiXNCqF0VI0Dw.jpg)

Frivolous pursuit? He explains -

> Is it possible to imagine a more frivolous pursuit than GWAS? Well, other
than sequencing, I mean ;). At least The tuba playing, Abe Lincoln
impersonating, Korean translating for Rodman, competitive eating, Manhattan
walking and all the rest are not being done with false promises at the expense
of taxpayers who contribute to the economy by tuba playing, Abe Lincoln
impersonating, Korean translating for Rodman, competitive eating, etc... To my
mind frivolous is taking money from society under false promises, returning
nothing of value compared to what was advertised, and then asking for more
money because of said failure... Which pursuit is more frivolous, I ask
you......

