---
title: Blogs Are Dangerous - says Geoffrey North of Current Biology
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Editor Geoffrey North of Current Biology is clearly [losing his sleep over
blogs](http://www.cell.com/current-biology/fulltext/S0960-9822\(13\)00514-9)
and that is a good thing.
<!--more-->

>

I think there is a clear good side, illustrated by cases where papers making
very radical claims on shaky grounds are published in high-profile journals to
large media acclaim.

The dude is so worried about blogs, he could not use the word good without
quotes, yet went on to make his own radical claims.

>

Here we have a healthy system operating in such a way as to correct, in timely
fashion, a mistake in the scientific literature the timeliness is particularly
important in such a case, as the doubts were raised so soon after the initial
media reaction, while the issue was still very much in the air.

But there is also, I think, a danger here, which lies in the very speed of
response, and the way that blogs are essentially vanity publications which
lack the constraints of more conventional publishing they are not reviewed,
and do not even have to pass the critical eye of any editor. In principle,
anyone can write a blog and criticize anything they do not have to have any
specific expertise. And the criticism can be picked up, advertised and
amplified, for example by Twitter, by those who feel a post supports their
agenda.

Such criticism can of course be harmful at the least there tends to be a no
smoke without fire effect. And once a scientific reputation has been tainted,
it can be hard to restore confidence.

Actually, very few scientists are as worried about blogs as the guardians of
the 'healthy system', and the reason would be apparent by putting the
spotlight what Geoffrey North describes as healthy. An [author of textbook on
evolution](http://www.amazon.com/Fundamentals-Molecular-Evolution-Dan-
Graur/dp/0878932666) wrote a rebuttal about ENCODE's hyped up claims that
textbooks need to be rewritten based on their 'discoveries', and [here is what
the journal editors made him go
through](http://judgestarling.tumblr.com/post/47585203217/sean-eddy-knows-on-
which-side-the-bread-is-buttered).

>

The publication process was not an easy one. The paper was first submitted to
Trends in Genetics on 11/11/2013, but three weeks later, the editor, a certain
Rhiannon Macrae, told us that he only has one review, but that was irrelevant
since he cannot consider the article anyway because it is too long. That was
very weird; three weeks to count the words in a text? His letter, moreover,
hinted that he would breathe more easily if we withdrew the paper, so we did.
We did, however, get the single review by email.

This very weird review had three parts. The first summarized the situation as
Graur is mad, and not entirely without cause. The only reason justifying our
being mad, according to this reviewer were the excessive claims surrounding
the major ENCODE paper having given ammunition to intelligent designers. The
second part of the review characterized our many analyses and discussions as
being little better than invective, ridicule, snickers, sarcasm, polemics,
excesses, silliness, superficiality, haphazardness, irrelevancies, zingers,
and slander. These insults and their many synonyms were contained in a review
about one page in length. Only DNA is packed more efficiently. The third part
of the review contained a summary: It would be good for Trends in Genetics to
publish a reasoned and dispassionate critical essay on this topic by someone
of Graurs stature, but not him. Of course at 63 (192 cm), I knew that I had
some stature in molecular evolution; nonetheless the stature part supplied
amusement to my friends and family for many days.

Our paper was, then, submitted to Genome Biology and Evolution and was sent to
seven reviewers. This number is, in my opinion, unprecedented. The seven
reviews + the comments by the editor ran over many pages, and after two rounds
of revisions (for which we were extremely grateful), the paper was out.

You want another one? Check the following link, where a good paper was
rejected for no good reason.

[Mapping God Found Scientifically Dishonest by Anonymous Peer
Reviewers](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/students/2013/05/29/mapping-god-
scientifically-dishonest/)

We can go on and on about how peer review system is not working. Blogs are
doing their right job, which is to keep journal editors worried about losing
their journal's reputation by allowing too many sensational junk papers.

