---
title: Real and Unreal Disasters
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Last year, we covered a Nature paper on nuclear contamination related to
Fukushima. BBC misrepresented its content and we had to pull up text from the
actual paper.
<!--more-->

[Severe Abnormalities Found in Fukushima
Butterflies](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2012/08/13/severe-abnormalities-
found-in-fukushima-butterflies/)

> Here we show that the accident caused physiological and genetic damage to
the pale grass blue Zizeeria maha, a common lycaenid butterfly in Japan. We
collected the first-voltine adults in the Fukushima area in May 2011, some of
which showed relatively mild abnormalities. The F1 offspring from the first-
voltine females showed more severe abnormalities, which were inherited by the
F2 generation. Adult butterflies collected in September 2011 showed more
severe abnormalities than those collected in May. Similar abnormalities were
experimentally reproduced in individuals from a non-contaminated area by
external and internal low-dose exposures. We conclude that artificial
radionuclides from the Fukushima Nuclear Power Plant caused physiological and
genetic damage to this species.

For those, who are paying attention, Fukushima had been leaking huge amount of
nuclear materials in the ocean since the Tsunami. BBC reports -

[Fukushima leak is 'much worse than we were led to
believe'](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-environment-23779561)

> A nuclear expert has told the BBC that he believes the current water leaks
at Fukushima are much worse than the authorities have stated.

Mycle Schneider is an independent consultant who has previously advised the
French and German governments.

He says water is leaking out all over the site and there are no accurate
figures for radiation levels.

Surprise !! Wasn't it BBC, who was spreading misinformation on the extent of
damage last year?

**How bad is the contamination?**

The butterfly disease is possibly spreading to fish on the Pacific coast of
USA.

[Biologist: Pacific herring in Canada bleeding from eyeballs, faces, fins,
tails Ive never seen fish looking this bad All 100 examined were bloody
Officials informed of hemorrhaging soon after 3/11 Govt ignoring problem
(PHOTO)](http://enenews.com/biologist-pacific-herring-in-canada-bleeding-from-
eyeballs-faces-fins-tails-ive-never-seen-fish-looking-this-bad-all-100-caught-
were-bleeding-hemorrhaging-first-noticed-in-summer-of-201)

> The Globe and Mail, Aug 13, 2013 (Emphasis Added): Independent fisheries
scientist Alexandra Morton is raising concerns about a disease she says is
spreading through Pacific herring causing fish to hemorrhage. [...] **Two days
ago I did a beach seine on Malcolm Island [near Port McNeill on northern
Vancouver Island] and I got approximately 100 of these little herring and they
were not only bleeding from their fins, but their bellies, their chins, their
eyeballs. [...] It was 100 per cent I couldnt find any that werent bleeding to
some degree. And they were schooling with young sockeye [salmon]**

Sun News, Aug 12, 2013: [Morton] dragged up several hundred of the fish this
past weekend and found the apparent infection had spread instead of their
usual silver colour the fish had eyes, tails, underbellies, gills and faces
plastered with the sickly red colour. **I have never seen fish that looked
this bad,** [...] In June, the affected fish were only found in eastern
Johnstone Strait, but have since spread to Alert Bay and Sointula, she said.

For more details on other kinds of fish getting contaminated, please check -

[Is Fukushima Radiation Contaminating Tuna, Salmon and Herring On the West
Coast of North America?](http://www.zerohedge.com/contributed/2013-08-26
/fukushima-radiation-contaminating-tuna-salmon-and-herring-west-coast-north-
am)

[West Coast of North America to Be Hit Hard by Fukushima
Radiation](http://www.washingtonsblog.com/2013/08/west-coast-of-north-america-
to-be-hit-hard-by-fukushima-radiation.html)

[You Wont BELIEVE Whats Going On at Fukushima Right
Now](http://www.washingtonsblog.com/2013/08/fukushima-worse-than-you-
know.html)

[Radiation Levels Skyrocket at
Fukushima](http://www.washingtonsblog.com/2013/06/radiation-levels-skyrocket-
at-fukushima.html)

Fukushima continues to be a real disaster. That is why media stays mum on it.

\-------------------------------------------------------------------

**Unreal disaster**

[Meteorologist Joe Bastardi: 2013 North Pole Seeing Coldest Summer Ever
Recorded By DMI](http://notrickszone.com/2013/08/12/meteorologist-joe-
bastardi-2013-north-pole-seeing-coldest-summer-ever-recorded-by-dmi/)

> Speaking of cool, North Pole temperatures have fallen below freezing way in
advance of where they normally do this year. This is the coldest summer ever
recorded by the Danish Meteorological Institute; they started looking back at
this in the 1950s. At the North Pole theres only one or two days that actually
reached normal and some of this propaganda thats going on now look Im going to
have to show you and debunk that whole situation.

[Climate model forecasts](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2012/07/28/on-
global-warming/) show that those polar bears will have 'nowhere to go' in 2050
winter, but right now they need blankets to make it through the current
summer.

![](http://advocacy.britannica.com/blog/advocacy/wp-content/uploads/polar-
bears-1.jpg)

**Trying to Avoid Cold Arctic Summer on a Makeshift Raft?**

We know what the climate change religious backers will say - 'one swallow
doesn't make a summer', or one summer would not let them swallow their pride.
How about three?

[Cooling Poles Top 3 Coldest Arctic Summers Will Have All Occurred In Past 5
Years](http://notrickszone.com/2013/07/28/cooling-poles-top-3-coldest-arctic-
summers-will-have-all-occurred-in-past-5-years/)

> Arctic summers can be examined going back to 1958 using data from the Danish
Meteorological Institute here. It turns out the 3 coldest Arctic summers have
all occurred in the last 5 years. Not even the summers of the 1960s were
colder. 2013 still has about three weeks to go, yet the forecasts show that
its place in the record books is pretty much secured.

