---
title: Turtle - the Luckiest Animal of the Month
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Few days back, we wrote about [the genome paper of western painted
turtle](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2013/04/19/genome-of-western-painted-
turtle/). We were also surprised, because -
<!--more-->

> We also noticed that the authors did very comprehensive work on genome
analysis, and were surprised that the paper got published in Genome Biology
unlike many other comparable genome papers published over the last few months.

Our question to the authors went unanswered, but maybe now we have one. Turtle
is one lucky animal to have so many genomes published within a month.

[The draft genomes of soft-shell turtle and green sea turtle yield insights
into the development and evolution of the turtle-specific body
plan](http://www.nature.com/ng/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/ng.2615.html)

> The unique anatomical features of turtles have raised unanswered questions
about the origin of their unique body plan. We generated and analyzed draft
genomes of the soft-shell turtle (Pelodiscus sinensis) and the green sea
turtle (Chelonia mydas); our results indicated the close relationship of the
turtles to the bird-crocodilian lineage, from which they split ~267.9248.3
million years ago (Upper Permian to Triassic). We also found extensive
expansion of olfactory receptor genes in these turtles. Embryonic gene
expression analysis identified an hourglass-like divergence of turtle and
chicken embryogenesis, with maximal conservation around the vertebrate
phylotypic period, rather than at later stages that show the amniote-common
pattern. Wnt5a expression was found in the growth zone of the dorsal shell,
supporting the possible co-option of limb-associated Wnt signaling in the
acquisition of this turtle-specific novelty. Our results suggest that turtle
evolution was accompanied by an unexpectedly conservative vertebrate
phylotypic period, followed by turtle-specific repatterning of development to
yield the novel structure of the shell.

If we get time, we will do a comparison of two genome papers and write a
separate blog post for our readers.

