---
title: Where Will Next Generation of Scientists (NGS) Come From?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Answer can be found from [the global survey](http://www.businessinsider.com
/pisa-rankings-2013-12) of math, science and reading abilities conducted by
OECD (h/t: @dangraur) and is consistent with the forecasts homolog.us blog
made a year ago (check [Our Vision for Biology of 21st
Century](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/students/2012/08/16/our-vision-for-
biology-during-21st-century/), [A Chart to Back our Forecast for 21st
Century](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/students/2012/08/21/a-chart-to-back-our-
forecast-for-21st-century/) and [A Real-life Example of Our Forecast for 21st
Century](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2012/09/17/a-real-life-example-of-
our-forecast-for-21st-century/)).
<!--more-->

![](http://static3.businessinsider.com/image/529db2aa6bb3f7f9318b1f62-1009-712
/screen%20shot%202013-12-03%20at%205.29.16%20am.png)

More details are available from the [OECD press
release](http://www.oecd.org/newsroom/Asian-countries-top-OECD-s-latest-PISA-
survey-on-state-of-global-education.htm):

> The survey reveals several features of the best education systems. Top
performers, notably in Asia, place great emphasis on selecting and training
teachers, encourage them to work together and prioritise investment in teacher
quality, not classroom sizes. They also set clear targets and give teachers
autonomy in the classroom to achieve them.

Children whose parents have high expectations perform better: they tend to try
harder, have more confidence in their own ability and are more motivated to
learn.

What should a biology/bioinformatics-student do with these information? [Our
suggestion from 2012](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2012/08/11/top-n
-reasons-not-to-do-a-ph-d-in-bioinformaticscomputational-biology/) still looks
useful.

> Instead of being all negative, we also like to make some constructive
suggestions to young students. If there is one thing homolog.us blog would
recommend to young biology students, that is to learn Chinese and translate a
biology paper to Chinese. It is far more important language to learn at this
point of your career than C, C++ or Java.

