---
title: Teaching Bioinformatics on Raspberry Pi
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
This is really cool !!!
<!--more-->

[4273?: Bioinformatics education on low cost ARM
hardware](http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/14/243) (h/t:
@OmicsOmicsBlog)

>

**Background**

Teaching bioinformatics at universities is complicated by typical computer
classroom settings. As well as running software locally and online, students
should gain experience of systems administration. For a future career in
biology or bioinformatics, the installation of software is a useful skill. We
propose that this may be taught by running the course on GNU/Linux running on
inexpensive Raspberry Pi computer hardware, for which students may be granted
full administrator access.

**Results**

We release 4273?, an operating system image for Raspberry Pi based on Raspbian
Linux. This includes minor customisations for classroom use and includes our
Open Access bioinformatics course, 4273? Bioinformatics for Biologists. This
is based on the final-year undergraduate module BL4273, run on Raspberry Pi
computers at the University of St Andrews, Semester 1, academic year 20122013.

**Conclusions**

4273? is a means to teach bioinformatics, including systems administration
tasks, to undergraduates at low cost.

Two important questions:

(i) Do we need a big computer for teaching bioinformatics?

> Though far slower than current desktop and laptop computers, the Raspberry
Pi is notably faster than the Cray 1 supercomputer [15], a marvel of computer
speed in its day. The valid question arises as to how much computer power is
actually required to teach undergraduates bioinformatics? We propose that the
answer is, by current standards, not much. The Raspberry Pi is more than
adequate for the task. The Raspberry Pi approach includes all the benefits of
the laptop approach, above, but at lower cost. In addition, the Raspberry Pi
is a new and exciting computer system, which in itself can add interest to the
course.

(ii) Can Raspberry Pi be Used for Complex Tasks like Genome Assembly?

Answer is yes.

[Many Good Slides at MSU NGS Analysis
Workshop](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/06/20/many-good-slides-at-msu-
ngs-analysis-workshop/)

