---
title: 'Cancer: Story of a Real Patient'
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
A large number of papers get published on cancer cell-lines, cancer GWAS,
cancer microarray analysis and so on. Doing research on cancer is quite
lucrative for the researchers, who made their [self-serving measure of
productivity](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19509541) (number of
publications) to keep the racket going. The real productivity should be
defined in terms of number of patients cured, but that aspect gets lost in the
whole process.
<!--more-->

> Research production and international cooperative teamwork in the 2 main
journals of gynecologic oncology increased within the 10 last years; 65.3% of
all published articles dealt either with epithelial ovarian cancer, cervical
cancer, or endometrial cancer. Endometrial cancer had the worst ratio number
of publications to estimated national incidence (United States, 2007). The
United States (41.15%) and Europe (29.72%) make up a striking 70.87% of the
worlds research production in the field of gynecologic oncology. However, the
highest rate of increase shows in Turkey (22.5), the Peoples Republic of China
(6.87), and South Korea (5.83). Adjusted to the national GDP per capita and
population for the year 2006, research productivity seems best in Israel,
Austria, and Turkey.

![](http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-TIVORmME2Po/UT4hkd2RQ0I/AAAAAAAAVYU/1IWPmlzn8qE/
s1600/Mish+Morton+Blog+Crop3.png)

Real patients, on the other hand, are figuring out that leaving the cancer
racket altogether and taking matters in their own hand works better for them.
Here is a beautiful story of a blogger, who cured his own cancer. Mish is one
of my favorite financial bloggers. He started writing [his
blog](http://globaleconomicanalysis.blogspot.com/) in early 2005 around the
time I posted my deflation articles at safehaven
([here](http://www.safehaven.com/article/2423/the-flation-debate),
[here](http://www.safehaven.com/article/2478/nonlinearity-memory-effect-and-
the-markets)). Not only his economic views are very similar to mine, our
original training happened to be in the same field (electrical engineering).
His blog usually ranks around the top among the alternate economic and
financial websites, which says a lot about academic economists.

Today he wrote in ["Cancer Free: I Beat Prostate Cancer; Mish the Guinea
Pig"](http://globaleconomicanalysis.blogspot.com/2013/12/cancer-free-i-beat-
prostate-cancer-mish.html):

> In October 2012 I was diagnosed with prostate cancer. I am now cancer free.
Here is my story, a detailed one, with test results.

I have been taking PSA tests every couple years since 2007. It's a routine
blood test recommended for men as they get older.

PSA stands for Prostate Specific Antigen. Elevated readings may indicate
evidence of prostate cancer. Any reading under 3.0 is normal but some doctors
may say 4.0 and others 2.5. It's not an exact science to be sure.

My test in August of 2012 was elevated (6.65). Another test in October was
also elevated (7.13)

My regular doctor strongly recommended a biopsy.

The biopsy showed I had cancer.

It is a fascinating story that includes many aspects of fraudulent medical
system, the cancer research racket, other freely available information on
cancer-curing agents and how a curious person can heal himself by taking
calculated risk.

Following is the cocktail he designed for himself. For details on why, please
go through Mish's story.

> What follows is the cocktail that it took. It is based on the above research
as well as numerous other articles. The first four items in my cocktail mix
list were mentioned above.

I also took a few other things for other reasons. Explanations follow my list.

This is not a recommendation. Consult your doctor.

**Mish Cocktail **

Resveratrol: 250 mg twice daily

Indole-3-Carbinol: 200mg twice daily

Bromelain: 500mg twice daily

Querceten: 300mg twice daily

Turmeric Extract: 300 mg twice daily

Vitamin D3: 5,000 IU twice daily

Vitamin K2: 100mcg twice daily

Vitamin B12: 100mcg twice daily

Selenium: 50mcg twice daily

Sodium bicarbonate orally: One half teaspoon twice daily - 1 hour in the
morning right after I get up, and again in the evening right before bed empty
stomach

I am noticing other similar stories popping up at various places online. We
are talking about real people getting cured and not scientific theories.
Hopefully, the general public will soon reach the same conclusion as the
researchers like MIT professor M. B. Yaffe that the gigantic cancer genome
sequencing projects are extremely wasteful. Check ["Cancer Genomics and
Parable of Streetlight Effect"](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/05/22
/cancer-genomics-and-parable-of-streetlight-effect/) \-

> The massive resources devoted to genome sequencing of human tumors have
produced important data sets for the cancer biology community. Paradoxically,
however, these studies have revealed very little new biology. Despite this,
additional resources in the United States are slated to continue such work and
to expand similar efforts in genome sequencing to mouse tumors. It may be that
scientists are addicted to the large amounts of data that can be relatively
easily obtained, even though these data seem unlikely, on their own, to unveil
new cancer treatment options or result in the ultimate goal of a cancer cure.
Rather than using more tumor genetic sequences, a better strategy for
identifying new treatment options may be to develop methods for analyzing the
signaling networks that underlie cancer development, progression, and
therapeutic resistance at both a personal and systems-wide level.

Also note that the prevalence of cancer, stroke and diabetes in USA have the
same geographical distribution, closely matching poverty distribution. That
alone suggests that lifestyle has a much bigger contribution to these diseases
than the genomes.

[Cancer, Stroke and Diabetes in USA Environment versus
Genetics](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/07/28/cancer-and-diabetes-in-
usa-environment-versus-genetics/)

![](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/cancer-deaths-
mortality-rates-by-county-state.png)

![](http://www.azfoodbanks.org/images/uploads/food-hardship-
us%20map%2008-09.jpg)

