---
title: Homolog.us Blog Calls for Sean Eddy be Fired for the Sake of Good Science
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
![250px-Sean-eddy](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2013/04
/250px-Sean-eddy.jpg)
<!--more-->

"**ENCODE Says What?**" was Sean Eddy's first reaction right after ENCODE
paper and press releases came out. [Here is what he wrote in his
blog](http://selab.janelia.org/people/eddys/blog/?p=683) \-

>

So I read in the newspaper this week that the ENCODE project has disproven the
idea of junk DNA. I sure wish Id gotten the memo, because this week a
collaboration of labs led by myself, Arian Smit, and Jerzy Jurka just released
a new data resource that annotates nearly 50% of the human genome as
transposable element-derived, and transposon-derived repetitive sequence is
the poster child for what we colloquially call junk DNA.

The newspapers went on to say that ENCODE has revolutionized our understanding
of noncoding DNA by showing that far from being junk, noncoding DNA contains
lots of genetic regulatory switches. Well, thats also odd, because another
part of my lab is (like a lot of other labs in biology these days) studying
the regulation of genes in a model animals brain (the fruit fly Drosophila).
We and everyone else in biology have known for fifty years that genes are
controlled by regulatory elements in noncoding DNA.

Sean Eddy clearly understands that ENCODE's claims were blatantly false, but
is [singing a new tune now](http://www.cell.com/current-
biology/fulltext/S0960-9822\(13\)00289-3). Dan Graur thinks that his change of
opinion is a financially-motivated decision.

[Sean Eddy knows on which side the bread is buttered: Better be on the side of
good science funding than on the side of good
science.](http://judgestarling.tumblr.com/post/47585203217/sean-eddy-knows-on-
which-side-the-bread-is-buttered#_=_)

>

I am so-o-o mad with Sean Eddy. One can see black smoke coming from both of my
ears. So let me tall you a true (but possibly paranoid) story.

When the ENCODE Consortium started spreading its revolutionary message of 80%
of the genome is active and needed, thus disproving junk DNA and requiring
textbooks to be rewritten, Sean Eddy was one of the first to point out the
flaws in the ENCODE claims. His paper, however, was so polite, so demure, and
so parve, that no one noticed it and the leaders of ENCODE continued to spread
their hyped misinformation to the press and the gullible funding agencies. In
fact, one of the authors of the misinformation was THE funding agency (see
below).

The ENCODE ballon only exploded when my colleagues and I published a critique
in Genome Biology and Evolution.

The publication process was not an easy one. The paper was first submitted to
Trends in Genetics on 11/11/2013, but three weeks later, the editor, a certain
Rhiannon Macrae, told us that he only has one review, but that was irrelevant
since he cannot consider the article anyway because it is too long. That was
very weird; three weeks to count the words in a text? His letter, moreover,
hinted that he would breathe more easily if we withdrew the paper, so we did.
We did, however, get the single review by email.

We are not surprised. Right after Dan Graur's ENCODE criticism paper came out,
we sent a note to one of his co-authors saying that it was a courageous
decision to write the paper. He was surprised about the 'courage' part, and we
explained how science in this country gets manipulated by funding con game.
You either fall in line, or those controlling funding will cut you off. That
means if you are a young scientist and want to express disagreement with 'big
results', you better keep your opinions limited to your pub buddies. End
result? All scientists agree about the big results, and ordinary people see
joint press releases from happy scientists hugging each other.

We do not know, whether Sean Eddy's latest paper is really motivated by
funding decisions, but we can safely say the following three things -

(i) Sean Eddy is intellectually dishonest. In his latest paper, he did not
provide a single scientific reason for his 180 degrees change in opinion from
his first reaction after ENCODE press release came out.

(ii) Sean Eddy is a coward. Instead of backing the courageous decision by
Graur _et al._ to present their scientific arguments (which he happened to
agree with), he called Graur's paper 'vitriolic', etc.

(iii) Sean Eddy is the leader of an important computational group, and his
opinions can sway the decisions of many major science projects at various
institutions.

We do not see how we will be able to trust any science paper from the above
institution as long as Sean Eddy continues to stay in his position. For the
sake of good science, we recommend that HHMI and Janelia Farm request Sean
Eddy to [spend more time with his
family](http://virtuallinguist.typepad.com/the_virtual_linguist/2008/09
/politicians-who-quit-to-spend-more-time-with-their-family.html).

