---
title: Isolation and Characterization of RNA-Containing Exosomes
categories:
- ncRNA
---
Exosomes are 30-100 nm vesicles full of small RNAs secreted by all cell types.
[Here](http://www.jove.com/video/3037/isolation-and-characterization-of-rna-
containing-exosomes) is a good video from University of Gothenburg on
extraction of exosome.
<!--more-->

Alternative way is to use commercial kits like
[ExoQuick](http://www.biocat.com/cgi-
bin/page/sub2.pl?main_group=genomics&sub1=microrna&sub2=exosome_isolation)
[The link also has relevant citations]

\----------------------------------------

Here is a description of what exosomes do [from a 2013 report](http://www.rese
archgate.net/publication/234098355_Small_RNA_transcriptomes_of_two_types_of_ex
osomes_in_human_whole_saliva_determined_by_next_generation_sequencing) \-

> Small non-coding RNAs, such as microRNAs (miRNAs), are involved in diverse
processes, including organ development and tissue differentiation. Exosomes
are small membrane vesicles (30-100?nm in diameter) produced by numerous
cells. Recently, exosomes have been shown to contain miRNAs. However, the
small RNAs contained in exosomes are not fully characterized. In a previous
study, we found at least two types of salivary exosome that are different in
size and have different proteomes. Studies of salivary exosomal small RNAs are
limited to miRNAs. In this study, we examined small RNA transcriptomes using
next generation sequencing technology to elucidate a full transcriptome set of
small RNAs expressed in the two types of salivary exosomes and in whole saliva
(WS). Many types of small RNA, such as miRNA, piwi-interacting RNA (piRNA),
small nucleolar RNA (snoRNA) and other small RNAs are contained in salivary
exosomes and WS. Among these small RNAs we identified novel miRNA candidates.

**Other informative places:**

1\. Wiki - [Exosome
vesicle](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exosome_%28vesicle%29), [Exosome
complex](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exosome_complex)

2\. [ExoCarta - Exosome protein, RNA and lipid
database](http://www.exocarta.org/)

3\. [Exosome-mediated transfer of mRNAs and microRNAs is a novel mechanism of
genetic exchange between cells
(2007)](http://www.nature.com/ncb/journal/v9/n6/full/ncb1596.html)

4\. [Reconstitution, Activities, and Structure of the Eukaryotic RNA Exosome
(2007)](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0092867406014279)

5\. [Exosomes Fit to deliver small RNA
(2010)](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2974077/)

6\. [Exosome Isolation for Proteomic Analyses and RNA Profiling
(2011).](http://www.systembio.com/downloads/Taylor_2011.pdf)

7\. [Importance of RNA isolation methods for analysis of exosomal RNA:
Evaluation of different methods (2012) ](http://www.gene-quantification.de
/eldh-et-al-exosomal-rna-quality-2012.pdf)

8\. [Small RNA deep sequencing reveals a distinct miRNA signature released in
exosomes from prion-infected neuronal cells (2012)](http://nar.oxfordjournals.
org/content/early/2012/09/08/nar.gks832.full)

9\. [Exosomes: The Little Vesicles That Could
(2011)](http://bostonbiotechwatch.com/2011/04/20/exosomes-the-little-vesicles-
that-could/)

\-------------------------

**More specialized:**

[Exosome-mediated transfer of mRNAs and microRNAs is a novel mechanism of
genetic exchange between cells
(2007)](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17486113)

[Active Wnt proteins are secreted on exosomes
(2012)](http://www.nature.com/ncb/journal/v14/n10/abs/ncb2574.html)

[Exosome-mediated transfer of miR-133b from multipotent mesenchymal stromal
cells to neural cells contributes to neurite outgrowth
(2012)](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22605481)

\--------------------

**Early paper in yeast:**

[Yeast Exosome Mutants Accumulate 3?-Extended Polyadenylated Forms of U4 Small
Nuclear RNA and Small Nucleolar
RNAs](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC85098/)

\---------------------

**People to follow:**

Douglas D. Taylor

H. Valdi and the Swedish group mentioned at the top.

[this list will grow]

