---
title: Cancer, Stroke and Diabetes in USA - Environment versus Genetics
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Cancer, stroke and diabetes are the three major causes of death in USA, and as
a result, the government spends humongous amount of research money to figure
out the root causes of those diseases. Our readers [left many thoughtful
comments on the relevance of
#GWAS](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/07/26/genome-wide-association-
studies-gwas-are-they-replicable/), and suggested that maybe environmental
factors affect 10% of the cases, and but we still need to know the genetic
contribution. Will the same argument be true, if environment causes 50% of
cancers? What if the contribution is close to 90%? Of course, we do not have
any estimate for the environmental component, but the following charts appear
very suggestive.
<!--more-->

**Cancer**

Let us first take a look at the [cancer mortality
distribution](http://www.encognitive.com/node/10347). We see many red dots
(high mortality rate) concentrated at one part of the country. It is quite
possible that those people have bad cancer gene.

![cancer-deaths-mortality-rates-by-county-state](http://www.homolog.us/blogs
/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/cancer-deaths-mortality-rates-by-county-state-
300x242.png)

**Diabetes**

We also got county-wide distribution of diabetes around the country [from
CDC](http://www.blog.republicofmath.com/wp-
content/uploads/2012/06/CDC_diabetes_USA_2008.jpg). Strange, the same group of
people have bad diabetes genes as well.

![CDC_diabetes_USA_2008](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/07/CDC_diabetes_USA_2008-300x223.jpg)

**Stroke**

We got the stroke statistics from
[strokecenter.org](http://www.strokecenter.org/patients/about-stroke/stroke-
statistics/). Bad heart genes seem to be concentrated around the same part of
the country - Arkansas, Alabama, Lousiana, Georgia, Oklahoma, Mississippi,
etc.

![stroke-statistics-2000-2006-both](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/07/stroke-statistics-2000-2006-both.jpg)

\----------------------------------------------------

**Demographics - What is the genetic make-up of those in cancer, stroke and diabetes prone areas? **

Let us look at who lives in those areas. The following chart shows the county-
wide demographic distribution of USA from 2000 census. Clicking on the figure
will take you to main wiki page with a much larger figure. First thing you
will notice is that USA is highly segregated. We will not go into the details
of every region and rather focus on the disease-prone areas to see the genetic
make-up of people.

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/07/Capture28-300x164.png)

The first group we find there are those marked in 'purple'. They are the
American blacks from southern states. Does our disease-data suggest that the
blacks have all kinds of bad genes? Not really, because the yellow region
right above purple also falls within the disease-prone parts of the country.
What is the genetic make-up of those living in yellow region? Although the map
says 'American', in terms of genetic origin, they are mostly [Scotch-Irish
(Scots Irish)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scotch-Irish_American) or
immigrants from Ulster-region. Here is the history.

> Upon arrival in America, the Scotch-Irish at first usually referred to
themselves simply as Irish, without the qualifier Scotch. It was not until a
century later, following the surge in Irish immigration after the Great Irish
Famine of the 1840s, that the descendants of the earlier arrivals began to
commonly call themselves Scotch-Irish to distinguish them from the newer,
largely destitute and predominantly Roman Catholic immigrants.[11] The two
groups had little interaction in America, as the Scotch-Irish had become
settled years earlier primarily in the Appalachian region, while the new wave
of Irish American families settled primarily in northern and midwestern port
cities such as Boston, New York, or Chicago. However, many Irish migrated to
the interior in the 19th century to work on large-scale infrastructure
projects such as canals and railroads.[12]

..................

Most Scotch-Irish headed for Pennsylvania, with its good lands, moderate
climate, and liberal laws.[citation needed] By 1750, the Scotch-Irish were
about a fourth of the population, rising to about a third by the
1770s.[citation needed] Without much cash, they moved to free lands on the
frontier, becoming the typical western "squatters", the frontier guard of the
colony, and what the historian Frederick Jackson Turner described as "the
cutting-edge of the frontier."[39]

The Scotch-Irish moved up the Delaware River to Bucks County, and then up the
Susquehanna and Cumberland valleys, finding flat lands along the rivers and
creeks to set up their log cabins, their grist mills, and their Presbyterian
churches.[citation needed] Chester, Lancaster, and Dauphin counties became
their strongholds, and they built towns such as Chambersburg, Gettysburg,
Carlisle, and York; the next generation moved into western Pennsylvania.[40]
With large numbers of children who needed their own inexpensive farms, the
Scotch-Irish avoided areas already settled by Germans and Quakers and moved
south, down the Shenandoah Valley, and through the Blue Ridge Mountains into
Virginia.[citation needed] These migrants followed the Great Wagon Road from
Lancaster, through Gettysburg, and down through Staunton, Virginia, to Big
Lick (now Roanoke), Virginia. Here the pathway split, with the Wilderness Road
taking settlers west into Tennessee and Kentucky, while the main road
continued south into the Carolinas.[41][42]

So, if we like to explain prevalence of cancer, stroke and diabetes in terms
of genes, we will find that two groups - southern blacks and southern Scots-
Irish immigrants have the worst forms of genes.

But what if genes have nothing to do with prevalence of cancer, stroke and
diabetes in those regions? What if the [following
chart](http://www.azfoodbanks.org/index.php/hunger/) (showing hunger) and
other fifty similar charts showing poverty distribution is a better
explanation?

![](http://www.azfoodbanks.org/images/uploads/food-hardship-
us%20map%2008-09.jpg)

If the largest presence of cancer, stroke and diabetes in USA can indeed be
explained by poverty, which is an environmental factor, why are we spending
any money chasing genes?

