---
title: A Quantitative Comparison of DNA Sequence Assembly Programs
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Dedicated to Assemblathon, here is a paper [from the memory
lane](http://online.liebertpub.com/doi/pdfplus/10.1089/cmb.1994.1.257).
<!--more-->

> We have compared 11 sequence assembly programs for the accuracy and
reproducibility with which they assemble DNA fragments into a completed
sequence. To test the assemblers under controlled conditions, the rat
multidrug resistance (RATMDRM) gene sequence was randomly divided into
overlapping 200- to 400-base fragments. Various degrees of error, in the form
of miss-identified bases, missed bases, and duplicated bases, were randomly
added to these fragments. The probability of an error, and the type of error,
was modified using an error distribution template that was developed by
comparing the original fragments used to sequence RATMDRM with the final,
edited sequence stored in GenBank. From 0 to 15% error was then added to
independent sets of fragments, and assemblage was attempted. The quality of
the assemblages was evaluated by comparing the number of differences between
the assembled sequence and the original sequence. Tests were also done to
determine if the order in which fragments were added to a project affected the
final sequence and if the quality of assemblage was sequence dependent.
Similar results were also obtained using other, unrelated sequences. The
programs could be roughly divided into three groups based on the accuracy and
reproducibility of assembly. Three (GCG, FAB, and AutoAssembler) consistently
produced

consensus sequences oflow error and high reproducibility. Intermediate results
were obtained with five other programs (Sequencher, AssemblyLIGN, XBAP,
SeqMan, and AutoAssembler in a mode that made use of an external special
processor). Less satisfactory results were obtained with the remaining three
programs (GeneWorks, GENeration, and PC/Gene). The

ability of the programs to edit the assembled sequence was also compared. Five
of the programs were able to display and edit automatic sequencer trace files.
The Sequencher program had a particularly well-designed sequence editor that
allowed rapid examination and correction of assembly errors.

