---
title: Ion Torrent, Diffraction Limit and SOLiD Technology
categories:
- chem
---
[A good comparison of technologies](http://www.bio-
itworld.com/BioIT_Article.aspx?id=109647)
<!--more-->

> The Ion Inquisition

As the co-developer and champion of SOLiD sequencing, what got Kevin McKernan
and his colleagues so enthused about Ion Torrent? What got us excited was the
potential to break the diffraction limit, says McKernan.

What is the diffraction limit? It is difficult to optically resolve two
features that are shorter than the wavelength of light used to measure them.
Most DNA measurement systems use light wavelengths of 500-700 nanometers
(because smaller wavelengths mutate DNA). But measuring closely packed DNA
features smaller than 700 nm makes the two features blur together. In DNA
sequencing, the beads need to be spaced 700 nm apart so the photon wavelengths
can resolve them, which is highly inefficient.

[In 2010] We were in the process of mapping out another version of SOLiD that
would have multiple cameras, says McKernan. We always knew that that would
eventually hit the diffraction limit, and wed be fighting a brick fight with
photons with the other guys [Illumina] who make the same kind of box.

McKernan says the Ion Torrent technology has the potential to read features
less than 700 nm. Thats what opened our eyessomething as small as a transistor
can get down to 30 nm. Theyre not there today, but it has a very long runway.
Whereas we felt that if we built this next [SOLiD] optical system with
multiple cameras and so on, that would probably be the end of the road We were
all racing to that endpointeven though it would be a few years outand then
what? Nanopores break diffraction limits but there are complications.

On the other hand, the Ion platform not only breaks diffraction limits but
also uses the same front end methods as SOLiD. The Ion Torrent platform also
features a very different cycle timewhat McKernan calls real time detection on
nucleotide incorporation. Taken together, it is easy to see why McKernan and
colleagues took the plunge.

Taking McKernans place on the SOLiD team is Michael McKenna, who formerly
worked for Rothberg at Curagen, working on its own DNA ultra-thin gel
sequencer. He seemed like the perfect fit to shepherd this along, says
McKernan. But he deflected inquiries about Life Technologies other NGS
program, a single-molecule sequencing system under the direction of Joseph
Beecham that has been dubbed StarLite.

I was always focused on SOLiD, he says diplomatically. It was very exciting
work, I love Joes work. Its fascinatingtheres nothing cooler than watching
single molecules in real time. K.D.

