---
title: To Do (PhD in Bioinformatics) or Not To Do? - Six Months Later
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Reader Mark [asked our advice six months
back](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/02/06/to-do-phd-in-bioinformatics-
or-not-to-do-that-is-the-question/) about whether to do PhD or not in
bioinformatics.
<!--more-->

> I have a Masters in bioinformatics. I have been accepted to several top 10
programs for PhDs starting in the fall but have a full time job paying ~$80K a
year. I am about to be 28 and am very torn between whether or not I should do
the PhD at this stage in my life or not.

I have no interest in academia, I want to be in industry for life, and would
only use the PhD as a stepping stone to a higher level position than the
technician (actually my title is scientist, but I understand that its
basically a technician/specialist ceiling with a masters) role that I am
delegated to. I want to be a director of research or a VP in industry not some
academic developing algorithms and earning $70-80K my whole life.

What the hell do I do?

We wish he instead asked about whether to get married or have kids, because
such questions are a lot easier to answer. We pointed out two minuses and one
plus -

1\. Opportunity cost - minus

2\. Chance to meet and know many smart people - plus

3\. A system run by through government grant - minus

Others offered various suggestions in the comment section and you can read
them [here](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/02/06/to-do-phd-in-
bioinformatics-or-not-to-do-that-is-the-question/).

Two days back, reader Timothy asked about what Mark decided and we pinged him
for an update.

Ladies and gentlemen, the final answer is -

>

Hi Timothy,

I decided that I still needed more time to think about the decision and got a
1 year deferral. I very much would like to return to research, but losing two
years (essentially replicating my Masters degree at the new institution)
before picking a lab (already know which lab I would be in, ultimately) is a
big turn off for me.

Also, speaking with so many people with PhDs that I work with who have said it
would be a waste of my time unless I wanted to teach (which I dont, at least
not right now) isnt much help either.

Our congratulation to Mark for thinking through a problem and coming to an
answer that is not yes or no !! That is what PhDs do :)

Incidentally, we are finding out that our point 2 (Chance to meet and know
many smart people at the universities) are less of a constraint, thanks to
various Meetup groups popping up in different towns. For example, we often go
to a [Sequencing Meetup in Seattle](http://www.meetup.com/Seattle-Sequencing-
Meetup/) and find it to be an excellent source of information and a place to
meet bright people. The same is true for [online communities like
Biostar](http://www.biostars.org/), which brings together smart
bioinformaticians from all around the world. We wrote about Biostar in several
commentaries linked below -

[Biostar I Discussions with Biostars
Istvan](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/software/2013/06/12/biostars/)

[Biostar II the Code](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/software/2013/06/13/biostar-
ii-design-of-the-code/)

[Biostars III The Community](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/software/2013/06/13
/biostars-ii-views-of-heavy-users-infrequent-users-and-exes/)

[Biostar: Comments from Khader
Shameer](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/software/2013/06/16/biostar-comments-
from-khader-shameer/)

[Biostar the Final Verdict](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/software/2013/06/14
/biostar-the-final-verdict/)

