---
title: Hilarious Turn in Fight against Global Warming, Thanks to Hard-working Chinese
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
The efforts of Western countries to stop global warming took a hilarious turn.
Before we get there, let us recap the popular narrative.
<!--more-->

**The problem:** Our earth is getting too hot due to all CO2-emitting technologies, such as gas-guzzling cars and farting cows. 

> A United Nations report has identified the world's rapidly growing herds of
cattle as the greatest threat to the climate, forests and wildlife. And they
are blamed for a host of other environmental crimes, from acid rain to the
introduction of alien species, from producing deserts to creating dead zones
in the oceans, from poisoning rivers and drinking water to destroying coral
reefs.

....

Burning fuel to produce fertiliser to grow feed, to produce meat and to
transport it - and clearing vegetation for grazing - produces 9 per cent of
all emissions of carbon dioxide, the most common greenhouse gas. And **their
wind and manure** emit more than one third of emissions of another, methane,
which warms the world 20 times faster than carbon dioxide.

**The solutions:** Start using solar panels (takes care of CO2-problem from burning gas) and turn to Hinduism (takes care of cow problem). 

We made up the second part, but solar panels as the cure for global warming
has been accepted everywhere from Germany to Spain and California. Everyone
accepts that sun does not pollute. So, all those places started to give people
tax-incentive to install solar panels, so that initial investment in getting
the solar panel up and running could save the planet for centuries, or that is
what we are told.

**Not any more !!**

Few hard-working Chinese seemed to have foiled the plans of these do-gooders.
The do-gooders of Germany, Spain and California thought that they could feed
alternate-energy companies paying for their election budget. To their peril,
the Chinese produced much cheaper solar panels than the domestic company,
which should be seen as a boon for saving the planet. Unfortunately, the do-
gooders do not see things that way. Spain installed a new tax on sun to make
sure people do not buy solar panels that are too cheap !!

[Spain Levies Consumption Tax on
Sunlight](http://globaleconomicanalysis.blogspot.com/2013/07/spain-levies-
consumption-tax-on-sunlight.html)

[Its not the Moon that Makes People Mad it is the Sun](http://www.acting-
man.com/?p=25030&cpage=1)

Readers are encouraged to read the following link, but here is the proposed
change in a nutshell.

> The Secretary of State for Energy, Alberto Nadal, signed a draft royal
decree in which consumption taxes are levied on those who want to start solar
power systems on their rooftops. The tax, labeled a "backup toll" is high
enough to ensure that it will be cheaper to keep buying energy from current
providers.

If you get caught collecting photons of sunlight for your own use, you can be
fined as much as 30 million euros.

If you were thinking the best energy option was to buy some solar panels that
were down 80% in price, you can forget about it.

![](http://images2.layoutsparks.com/1/239278/sad-sun-face-eerie.jpg)

All we are waiting for is a theory from Al Gore that 'proves' that sun
pollutes !!

