---
title: Is Biostar Really Dying?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
[Joachim's Blog](http://joachimbaran.wordpress.com/2013/03/15/uh-oh-biostar/)
presented a number of interesting charts on user participation at [Biostar
forum](http://www.biostars.org/) and concluded:
<!--more-->

> I think the findings are quite clear this year: Biostar burns on a fresh
supply of short-lived users whose questions are no longer answered as
multifaceted as in Biostars early days. This blog post series was initially
created to investigate the quality of Biostar forum posts, but if the shown
statistical trends and developments are not addressed soon, then the Biostar
might irrevocably succumb to its fading.

We did not have enough time to think about various charts, but one of them
looked interesting.

![](http://joachimbaran.files.wordpress.com/2013/03/participation.png?w=594&h=
594)

Joachim interpreted the above graph as -

> In the next chart, I have plotted how long users participate on the Biostar
forum. If a user was active in Nov09, Feb10 and Dec11, then I count him/her as
having participated 3 months. It is rather surprising to see that the vast
majority of Biostar users do actually take part in forum posts less than six
months and that a tremendous proportion of Biostar users are only active for
just a single month. Considering the user activity from the previous graph
that means that many Biostar forum interactions are very short lived.

...but can the above chart be interpreted differently? What if the above graph
shows the same power law distribution present pervasively all over the
internet? (check paper by [Faloutsos
brothers](http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=316229) or [Barabasi's work cited
here](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scale-free_network)). Did Joachim end up
proving that Biostar is just like the internet? Saying differently, anyone
concluding in 1999 that the internet (not internet stocks) was dying was the
farthest from truth.

Maybe we are paying too much attention to one chart, whereas the other charts
of Joachim do back his point. We would like to hear the opinions of our
knowledgeable readers.

\------------------

Edit.

A reader forwarded me [this Biostar thread](http://www.biostars.org/p/6180/)
addressing Joachim's points.

>

When you first posted about this supposed fading (2 years ago) the site had
1,800 questions and 5,200 answers, 8,000 comments. By today we faded to 9,000
questions, 19,000 answers, 33,000 comments. Since last March we had 465,000
unique visitors (as measured by Google) the most ever recorded year-over-year.

The above comment is informative about Biostar, but from a scientific point of
view, we are curious to find out where Joachim's analysis went wrong. The best
explanation we can come up with is that the above chart is presented without a
good 'control', namely behavior of users for rest of the internet.

