---
title: Do Good Scientists Need to be Expert Mathematicians?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
[E. O. Wilson's](http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887323611604578398
943650327184.html) comments on mathematical skills seem to have touched few
raw nerves.
<!--more-->

>

If your level of mathematical competence is low, plan to raise it, but
meanwhile, know that you can do outstanding scientific work with what you
have. Think twice, though, about specializing in fields that require a close
alternation of experiment and quantitative analysis. These include most of
physics and chemistry, as well as a few specialties in molecular biology.

Newton invented calculus in order to give substance to his imagination. Darwin
had little or no mathematical ability, but with the masses of information he
had accumulated, he was able to conceive a process to which mathematics was
later applied.

For aspiring scientists, a key first step is to find a subject that interests
them deeply and focus on it. In doing so, they should keep in mind Wilson's
Principle No. 2: For every scientist, there exists a discipline for which his
or her level of mathematical competence is enough to achieve excellence.

[Dynamic Ecology blog
disagreed](http://dynamicecology.wordpress.com/2013/04/09/r-a-fisher-vs-e-o
-wilson-on-math-in-biology/) based on a quote from R. A. Fisher. Mike the Mad
Biologist claimed that [E.O. Wilson Gives Some Really Bad Career
Advice](http://mikethemadbiologist.com/2013/04/09/e-o-wilson-gives-some-
really-bad-career-advice/).

\------------------------------------------------

Even though the writer of this commentary represented a country in
International Maths Olympiad, we tend to side with E. O. Wilson. Mathematical
skills are too overrated, and lately 'mathematical model' argument is being
used to sell various dubious projects, while proper scientific approach is
taking a back seat. We will give two examples outside biology.

(i) When we pointed out in an article in 2005 that US housing prices were in a
bubble and most banks were making dubious loans, almost all economists told us
that the bank loans were supported by 'mathematical models made by very smart
individuals'. Later it turned out that those very smart people did not
consider the possibility that house prices could ever fall.

(ii) We wrote several times about [dubious nature of mathematical models for
global warming](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/07/28/on-global-warming/),
but not a single person showed us any error in our assertion based on redoing
the calculation himself.

