---
title: Biomickwatson's Ridiculous Criticism of ENCODE Critics
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
We are not sure why intelligent scientists need to post rather inane
commentaries in their blogs to get public attention.
<!--more-->

The context here is [biomicwatson's
response](http://biomickwatson.wordpress.com/2013/02/22/dear-encode/) to the
[latest Genome Biology and Evolution paper](http://gbe.oxfordjournals.org/cont
ent/early/2013/02/20/gbe.evt028.full.pdf+html) mentioned in [our previous
commentary](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2013/02/21/was-encodes-claim-of-80-of-
human-genome-being-functional-all-hype/). The paper not only challenged
ENCODE's hyped up claim of 80% functionality of human genome, it did so in a
way that makes you laugh. These days, you rarely read a funny scientific paper
that is not light on its technical correct.

[Biomickwatson is upset because we
laughed](http://biomickwatson.wordpress.com/2013/02/22/dear-encode/), and he
blames the little child, who called out the emperor naked. In his blog, he
posted a mock letter from Dan Graur (first author of paper criticizing
ENCODE). In fact, the mock letter was written in a funny way and we enjoyed
it. However, that is the only positive aspect of his commentary. We also
expected him to provide some serious criticism of Dan Graur's technical
discussions, and we did not find anything at all. Not only that, whenever
someone pointed out in the comment section he agreed with Dan Graur's
scientific content, Biomickwatson repeated 'I do not like the tone', 'I do not
like the tone' like a parrot. At some point, we started to wonder whether real
biomickwatson left town and a computer program took over the blog.

Getting back to Graur paper, we finished reading it and found the scientific
argument very solid irrespective of its mocking abstract. In fact, tone of
abstract and paper fitted its content perfectly. The question was to whether
ENCODE authors pre-determined the percentage of genome they wanted to see as
functional (guided by their desire to be on New York Times), and tweaked their
definition of 'functional' to reach that number. That is what seems to be
case, and Dan Graur paper was right in mocking that kind of PR-guided science.

The scariest part is that over 400 scientists signed their names on to ENCODE
paper without questioning its overt media-whoring, because to them the grant
money ENCODE brought likely justified being sloppy on science. In an earlier
era, science took precedence over money. Today 'getting the grant' is top
priority and science can be adjusted accordingly.

ENCODE decided to inflate the 'functional content' of human genome by calling
a region functional, whenever it was captured by any of the large-scale
experiments (DNA-methylation, CHiP-chip, histone methylation, etc.). Having
taken part in several large-scale studies over the last 10 years, we can shed
some light on the thinking process that goes behind them.

>

Step 1. Let us write a huge grant and request for all kinds of large-scale
experiments - "sequence all cancer genomes", "sequence every inch of soil on
earth", etc.

Step 2. Grant is approved. Large-scale data collection begins.

Step 3. We have tons of data. Now we need a 'high-impact' paper, or otherwise
we will not get the next big grant.

We do not have any problem with steps 1 and 2, but step 3 is where everything
gets fast and loose. There are two ways to achieve 3 - through careful science
or by using PR. The science-based way requires researchers to dig through the
data, find interesting patterns and run small-scale experiments. Even after
that, a high-impact publication is not guaranteed. PR approach is to sell the
fact that the researchers collected huge amount of data and only needs to
invent a punchline. The 80% functionality of human genome is the punchline
that got ENCODE to NY Times and potentially secures their next wasteful grant.
Whether researchers are still doing science after five or six iterations of
above process is a big question.

'Off camera', most scientists acknowledge the above process, but they all wimp
out, when they have to do the same publicly (as you can see here in [Titus
Brown's 'why I blog'
commentary](http://ivory.idyll.org/blog/why-i-blog-2013-version.html)). After
all, who wants to offend 400+ scientists, who would be sitting in his grant
committees and reject their grants, because he made legitimate criticism of
their research? From that view point, it was rather courageous of Dan Graur
and colleagues to point out ENCODE's ridiculous claims in a paper, and put
their names in it.

We can easily answer the question posed by Graur _et al._ here -

> At this point, we must ask ourselves, what is the aim of ENCODE: Is it to
identify every possible functional element at the expense of increasing the
number of elements that are falsely identified as functional? Or is it to
create a list of functional elements that is as free of false positives as
possible. If the former, then sensitivity should be favored over selectivity;
if the latter then selectivity should be favored over sensitivity. ENCODE
chose to bias its results by excessively favoring sensitivity over
specificity. In fact, they could have saved millions of dollars and many
thousands of research hours by ignoring selectivity altogether, and
proclaiming a priori that 100% of the genome is functional. Not one functional
element would have been missed by using this procedure.

ENCODE's aim is to get their next huge grant approved and they need public
attention.

We enjoyed Dar Graur's discussion on why junk DNA was called junk DNA in the
first place. The word junk was not used in derogatory sense (such as junk
mail) and was more like junk sitting in someone's garage.

> If there was a single succinct take-home message of the ENCODE consortium,
it was the battle cry Junk DNA is Dead! Actually a surprisingly large number
of scientists have had their knickers in a twist over junk DNA ever since the
term was coined by Susumu Ohno (1972). The dislike for the term became more
evident following the disappointing finding that protein-coding genes occupy
only a minuscule fraction of the human genome.

The paucity of protein-coding genes in the human genome in conjunction with
the fact that the lowly nematode Caenorhabditis elegans turned out to have
20,517 protein-coding genes, resulted in a puzzling situation similar to the
C-value paradox (Thomas 1971), whereby the number of genes did not sit well
with the perceived complexity of the human organism. Thus, junk DNA had to go.

>

First, we note that Susumu Ohnos original definition of junk DNA referred to a

genomic segment on which selection does not operate (Ohno 1972). The correct
usage implies a genomic segment that has no immediate use, but that might
occasionally acquire a useful function in the future. This sense of the word
is very similar to the colloquial meaning of junk, such as when a person
mentions a garage full of junk, in which the implication is that the space is
full of useless objects, but that in the future some of them may be useful. Of
course, as in the case of the garage full of junk, the vast majority of junk
DNA will never acquire a function. This sense of the term junk DNA was used by
Franois Jacob in his famous paper Evolution and Tinkering (Jacob 1977):
[N]atural selection does not work as an engineer... It works like a tinkerera
tinkerer who does not know exactly what he is going to produce but uses
whatever he finds around him whether it be pieces of string, fragments of
wood, or old cardboards... The tinkerer... manages with odds and ends. What he
ultimately produces is generally related to no special project, and it results
from a series of contingent events, of all the opportunities he had to enrich
his stock with leftovers.

It is accepted that humans are the most complex of all creatures and therefore
they should have had the most number of genes. When that did not work out, the
complexity was supposed to be reflected by almost 100% of genome being
'functional'. Interestingly, that struggle to 'prove' that human genome is the
most complex of all brought ENCODE and creationists arguing for the same
thing, as Dan Graur pointed out -

>

We urge biologists not be afraid of junk DNA. The only people that should be
afraid are those claiming that natural processes are insufficient to explain
life and that evolutionary theory should be supplemented or supplanted by an
intelligent designer (e.g., Dembski 1998; Wells 2004). ENCODEs take-home
message that everything has a function implies purpose, and purpose is the
only thing that evolution cannot provide.

We request everyone to read and think through Dan Graur's paper, and then
request government to stop funding ENCODE to get back our scientists.

\--------------------------------

Edit.

1\. PZ Myers posted a good summary of Dan Graur's paper that we recommend for
our readers -

[ENCODE gets a public
reaming](http://freethoughtblogs.com/pharyngula/2013/02/22/encode-gets-a
-public-reaming/)

2\. Thanks to @jaredtsimpson for pointing out that the Graur paper was in
Genome Biology and Evolution. We made the changes in text.

