---
title: Personalized Medicine and BRCA Case Study
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Media buzz about 'personalized medicine' [increased quite a bit over the last
1-2 years](http://www.nytimes.com/2012/07/09/health/new-frontiers-of-cancer-
treatment-bring-breathtaking-swings.html). It is being proposed that we are on
the verge of a major medical breakthrough in cancer treatment because of
falling costs in DNA sequencing. To separate wheat from chaff in those claims,
let us revisit four most exciting years of cancer research in recent history.
<!--more-->

Geneticists in lab coat rarely get featured in NY Times, but the period
1990-1994 were different. Media covered 'international race to find breast
cancer gene' with as much attention as they do for major sports events. When
the coveted gene was finally found, [NY Times
wrote](http://www.nytimes.com/1994/09/15/us/scientists-identify-a-mutant-gene-
tied-to-hereditary-breast-cancer.html) \-

> Capturing a genetic trophy so ferociously coveted and loudly heralded that
it had taken on a near-mythic aura, a collaborative team of researchers has
announced the discovery of a gene whose mutation causes hereditary breast
cancer.

Although the researchers caution that they are still far from developing a
diagnostic test as a result of their finding, the announcement will be of
great relevance to many of the women who now suspect they carry a familial
risk of breast cancer.

[This Nature Genetics
article](http://www.nature.com/ng/journal/v8/n2/pdf/ng1094-105.pdf) provides
more details on the nature of the race, and disappointments among those who
could not get the gene faster than Myrian Genetics. Two years later, [Kevin
Davies wrote his book Breakthrough: The Race to Find the Breast Cancer
Gene](http://www.amazon.com/Breakthrough-Race-Find-Breast-
Cancer/dp/0471120251) for ordinary people, and described the race as "proof
that modern medicine can at last offer something tangible in the battle
against a unique disease about which shockingly little is known."

![](http://ecx.images-amazon.com/images/I/7151FR7YH9L._BO2,204,203,200_PIsitb-
sticker-arrow-click,TopRight,35,-76_AA300_SH20_OU01_.gif)

> The race began in October 1990, when Dr. Mary-Claire King startled the
American Society of Human Genetics with the news that after fifteen years, her
research group had found irrefutable evidence of a gene linking heredity and
the risk of breast cancer. From that moment on, the quest to isolate the gene
became the focus of worldwide attention, eventually reaching fever pitch. In a
race against time and one another, "researchers relentlessly zeroed in on a
piece of DNA too small to see, for a prize too enormous to contemplate."

In addition to the pioneering Dr. King, the distinguished scientists profiled
include the renowned Francis Collins, who discovered the genes for cystic
fibrosis and Huntington's disease, and Mark Skolnick, the entrepreneurial
founder of Myriad Genetics, who made fascinating use of the genealogical
records of Mormons in his quest for the gene. The intensity of the project
brought out the extremes of scientific research, from exhilarating enthusiasm
and cooperation to heated rivalry.

Beyond its fast-paced chronicle of discovery, Breakthrough is also a story of
the politics of illness, focusing on the impact of the women's movement on
breast cancer research and the changing attitudes of the past twenty-five
years. Although, as the authors state, our "heightened awareness of the
disease has been very late in coming," there is genuine cause for hope.
Looking to the future, they explore current methods of screening and treatment
as well as the prospects for a cure.

In the United States alone, 183,000 new cases of breast cancer are diagnosed
each year50,000 in women under the age of forty. Breakthrough is proof that
modern medicine can at last offer something tangible in the battle against a
unique disease about which shockingly little is known.

Now that we are 20 years away from the end of race, it is possible to revisit
the promises and their outcome. We believe many claims and discoveries on
'personalized genetics' will go through similar process.

What happened since the? Here are few observations.

1\. **Patent Struggle**: One promise of BRCA1 discovery was to facilitate
early testing of breast cancer. Myriad Genetics [found a second gene BRCA2
shortly afterward, and patented the gene](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BRCA2).

> Myriad is the exclusive licensee of these patents and has enforced them in
the US against clinical diagnostic labs.[12] This business model led from
Myriad being a startup in 1994 to being a publicly traded company with 1200
employees and about $500M in annual revenue in 2012;[11] it also led to
controversy over high prices and the inability to get second opinions from
other diagnostic labs, which in turn led to the landmark Association for
Molecular Pathology v. Myriad Genetics lawsuit.[12][67] The patents begin to
expire in 2014.

According to an article published in the journal, Genetic Medicine, in 2010,
"The patent story outside the United States is more complicated. For example,
patents have been obtained but the patents are being ignored by provincial
health systems in Canada. In Australia and the UK, Myriads licensee permitted
use by health systems, but announced a change of plans in August 2008. ...
Only a single mutation has been patented in Myriads lone European-wide patent,
although some patents remain under review of an opposition proceeding. In
effect, the United States is the only jurisdiction where Myriads strong patent
position has conferred sole-provide status." Peter Meldrum, CEO of Myriad
Genetics, has acknowledged that Myriad has "other competitive advantages that
may make such [patent] enforcement unnecessary" in Europe.

So, Americans lost money for sponsoring the discovery and winning the race.
Even though Myriad found the first and second gene after winning four year
'race', the lead was generated through Dr. King's lab in Berkeley after her 15
years of research.

2\. **Too Many Cancer Genes:** Even if one can get genetic testing for cancer,
it does not say much about chances of having cancer except for few familial
cases. There are simply too many genes and too many mutations now linked to
cancer.

3\. **Locked up paper:** The original paper of Dr. King, which determined the
general location of the hereditary breast cancer gene in chr 17 [is still
locked up](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/250/4988/1684). So, not only
people lost in their ability to get diagonosed after paying for the research,
they also lost their right to even see the breakthrough papers.

4\. **Forgotten Discovery**: Dr. King's discovery that started the intense
four year international race isn't even listed among National Cancer
Institute's [150 years of advances against
cancer](http://www.cancer.gov/aboutnci/overview/150-years-advances/page8).

5\. Last but not the least, no cheap cure for breast cancer has been found
over the last 20 years. The price of medical care went up by leaps and bounds
in USA and life-saving cancer drugs [related to various genetic
discoveries](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HER2/neu) are extremely expensive.

\-----------------------------------

But there is hope, and that hope comes from getting big government funded
cancer projects out of the way. This NY Times article titled [Grant System
Leads Cancer Researchers to Play It Safe](http://www.nytimes.com/2009/06/28/he
alth/research/28cancer.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0) says -

> The cancer institute has spent $105 billion since President Richard M. Nixon
declared war on the disease in 1971. The American Cancer Society, the largest
private financer of cancer research, has spent about $3.4 billion on research
grants since 1946.

Yet the fight against cancer is going slower than most had hoped, with only
small changes in the death rate in the almost 40 years since it began.

One major impediment, scientists agree, is the grant system itself. It has
become a sort of jobs program, a way to keep research laboratories going year
after year with the understanding that the focus will be on small projects
unlikely to take significant steps toward curing cancer.

...whereas [young 15 year old kids motivated by personal experiences are
trying to find more innovative diagnosis
tools](http://globaleconomicanalysis.blogspot.com/2013/03/15-year-old-kid-
develops-foolproof-test.html).

> Here's an inspiring story for the weekend. Jack Andraka, a fifteen year old
freshman in high school, developed a paper sensor that could detect
pancreatic, ovarian and lung cancer in five minutes for as little as 3 cents.
He conducted his research at John Hopkins University.

Jack got the idea after a friend died of pancreatic cancer. His initial
research started on Wikepedia, then after he had an idea, Jack approached 200
research labs. 199 labs turned him down. The 200th said "maybe".

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/n9yuAhusVts" frameborder="0"> </iframe>
