---
title: Oh No !! Indians Are Suing Retraction Watch to Get Articles on Anil Potti Removed
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Every day takes India to another new low. What is wrong with the country,
where [top police office tells women to enjoy
rape](http://www.euronews.com/2013/11/13/india-crime-chief-causes-outrage-
with-if-you-cant-prevent-rape-you-enjoy-it-/)?
<!--more-->

We earlier covered ["Long-term Criminal Fraud at Indian Drug-maker
Ranbaxy"](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/05/22/epic-inside-story-of-
long-term-criminal-fraud-at-drug-maker-ranbaxy/), where their largest generic
drug company made a name for selling counterfeit drugs. In publishing, we
wrote about ["OMICS Publishing Group An Indian Open Access
Scam?"](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/08/14/omics-publishing-group-an-
india-based-open-access-scam/), where US-based librarian called them what they
really are and apparently got into trouble. To protect their honor, [those
jokers threatened to sue the librarian for 1 billion
dollar](http://chronicle.com/article/Publisher-Threatens-to-Sue/139243/) !!

This time, a lawyer in India sent meaningless DMCA notice out to stop
Retraction Watch from covering retraction-related news regarding Anil Potti.

[Wordpress Goes Legal: Sues Over Two Egregiously Bogus DMCA Notices That Were
Designed To Censor](http://www.techdirt.com/articles/20131121/01431725317
/wordpress-goes-legal-sues-over-two-egregiously-bogus-dmca-notices-that-were-
designed-to-censor.shtml)

> We've talked in the past about the unfortunate situation in which there is
almost no real punishment for bogus DMCA notices. Section 512(f) of the DMCA
is supposed to provide a way to get attorneys' fees, costs and damages for
bogus DMCA takedowns. In practice, however, 512(f) has been almost totally
neutered by the courts (not that it was ever strong to begin with). Lately,
however, there have been a series of interesting 512(f) cases, in which
people, including copyright expert Larry Lessig, have been dealing with clear
attempts to censor protected speech.

Today, there's a very interesting new entrant, fighting two separate cases to
go after the senders of totally bogus DMCA notices that were solely designed
to censor. Automattic, the company that runs the super popular blog hosting
platform WordPress.com, has filed two separate lawsuits against egregious
cases of DMCA abuse. These are actually two cases that we've written about as
examples of using the DMCA to try to censor criticism. The first involved an
attempt to remove a series of articles on the excellent RetractionWatch site,
run by Ivan Oransky and Adam Marcus, that were critical of researcher Anil
Potti. As we noted at the time, this appeared to be an egregious use of the
DMCA to censor content that someone didn't like. The second is the more recent
example of the group Straight Pride UK giving an interview to student
journalist Oliver Hotham, then deciding that they didn't like the fact that
they sounded like idiots in the interview, and tried to use the DMCA to take
down the article which included the quotes they had willingly given to Hotham.

Our advice - take your loved ones out of India before the country falls apart
and that can come as early as <del>2015</del> <del>2014</del> 2013.

