---
title: 'Cool Blog: Gas Station Without Pumps'
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
[Pacbio](http://gasstationwithoutpumps.wordpress.com/2011/12/16/pacbio-
artifacts/), bioinformatics, [electronic
circuits](http://gasstationwithoutpumps.wordpress.com/2013/09/22/electronic-
sensors-for-water-quality/), VLSI design,
[MOOCs](http://gasstationwithoutpumps.wordpress.com/2013/09/20/some-mooc-
retention-rates-amazingly-low/), home-schooling, blog without 'about me' -
what is there not to like? Our readers will enjoy [this very interesting
blog](http://gasstationwithoutpumps.wordpress.com/) from Santa Cruz,
California.
<!--more-->

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/10/Capture3.png)

We especially enjoyed his thorough coverage of the MOOCs (Massively Open
Online Course or 'Massively Overhyped Online Course' according to him)

1\. [MOOC game](http://gasstationwithoutpumps.wordpress.com/2012/11/27/mooc-
game/)

2\. [MOOC roundup](http://gasstationwithoutpumps.wordpress.com/2013/07/28
/mooc-roundup/)

3\. [MOOC failures in remedial
math](http://gasstationwithoutpumps.wordpress.com/2013/09/09/mooc-failures-in-
remedial-math/)

4\. [Some MOOC retention rates amazingly
low](http://gasstationwithoutpumps.wordpress.com/2013/09/20/some-mooc-
retention-rates-amazingly-low/)

Overall he concluded that the MOOCs had been complete failures.

> By now, probably everyone interested in the MOOC debate has read one or more
articles about San Jose States experiment with Udacity last Spring. The best
article Ive found about why San Jose State terminated the pilot is from the
San Jose Mercury News: MOOC mashup: San Jose State University Udacity
experiment with online-only courses fizzles. That article explains that the
experiment was stopped for the same reason that clinical trials are often
stoppedthere was clear evidence that the new treatment was worse than the
standard one.

We agree with him about the hype part, but that is what the VCs in Silicon
valley do to everything (and then dump the nascent companies to public).
However, does the failure of current crop of MOOCs mean that online courses
will continue to fail, or is there a successful model yet to be discovered?
After all, the first generation of internet search engines failed badly as
well. Maybe the current effort of replacing class-room lectures with identical
and remote video lectures is too dumb, because it has not utilize the full
power of the internet. The other possibility with MOOCs could be like
physicists' efforts to solve protein-folding, where the killer mix never got
discovered.

It will be interesting to revisit the MOOC debate [after Pavel Pevzner's
upcoming Coursera classes](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/10/02/new-
announcement-rosalind-team/). Rosalind had been a success story so far, and
Dr. Pevzner's team is putting quite a bit of effort on the course. Will they
discover the successful formula for online teaching?

\-------------------------------------------------------------

**Edit.** Please do not comment - 'it is the blog of so and so'. We know who the author is, but would prefer to let his contents speak for himself rather than his position or title.

