---
title: PacBio Data on Drosophila Release from Bergman Lab
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
PacBio enthusiasts have a whole new data set to play with. In July, Bergman
Lab released -
<!--more-->

[PacBio Whole Genome Shotgun Sequences for the D. melanogaster Reference
Strain](http://bergmanlab.smith.man.ac.uk/?p=1971)

> As part of a collaboration with Danny Miller and Scott Hawley from the
Stowers Institute, we have generated whole genome shotgun sequences using
PacBio RS technology for the Drosophila melanogaster y; cn, bw, sp strain
(Bloomington 2057), the same strain that was also used to assemble the D.
melanogaster reference genome sequence. Weve been meaning to release these
data to the community since we got the data in April, but have been waylaid by
teaching commitments and a spate of recent server problems. Prompted by Dannys
visit to the Bergman Lab over the last two weeks and the generous release by
Dmitri Petrovs lab of a data set of Illumina long reads using the Moleculo
technology for the same strain of D. melanogaster, weve finally gotten around
to bundling these D. melanogaster PacBio sequences for general release. Were
hoping that the availability of both PacBio and Moleculo long-read data for
the same strain that has one of the highest quality reference genomes for any
species will allow the genomics community to investigate directly the
pros/cons of each of these new exciting technologies.

Today, they released -

[Error-Corrected PacBio Sequences for the D. melanogaster Reference
Strain](http://bergmanlab.smith.man.ac.uk/?p=2151)

> Using PacBio and Illumina whole genome shotgun sequences we recently
released for the D. melanogaster reference strain, Sergey Koren and Adam
Phillippy at the University of Maryland have recently run their pacBioToCA
method to generate a dataset of error-corrected PacBio reads for this dataset,
which the have kindly made available here for re-use without restriction. This
pilot data set is not at high enough coverage and thus a whole genome assembly
was not attempted. Nevertheless, both the raw and error-corrected datasets
should be of use to better understand the nature of PacBio data and the
pacBioToCA pipeline as applied to Drosophila genomes.

One obvious question is stated with the first release. The data sets can be
used to compare Moleculo long reads with PacBio reads to see which technology
performs better. We started working on that question about three weeks back,
but had to put the analysis on hold to address other pressing needs.

Data release policy from Bergman lab -

> As with previous unpublished data we have released from the Bergman Lab, we
have chosen to release these genomic data under a Creative Commons CC-BY
license, which requires only that you credit the originators of the work as
specified below. However, we hope that users of these data respect the
established model of genomic data release under the Ft. Lauderdale agreement
that is traditionally honored for major sequencing centers.

We do not know what Ft. Lauderdale agreement means in the context of blog
posts. We [asked a similar
question](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2012/07/19/how-do-jgi-data-release-
policy-and-bleeding-edge-bioinformatics-fit-together/) over a year back, but
nobody replied.

