---
title: Sixth Sense in Vertebrates
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
When we think about senses, we consider one of five possibilities - vision,
smell, taste, touch and hearing. Instead, a group of vertebrates communicate
through different 'telepathic' mechanism that can be described as the sixth
sense.
<!--more-->

![Matt_Arnegard_3](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/02/Matt_Arnegard_3-150x150.jpg)

Two weeks back, we stopped by at Fred Hutch Research center and met [Matt
Arnegard](http://labs.fhcrc.org/peichel/people/arnegard.html), a very smart
post-doctoral researcher working on genomics of stickleback fishes. Matt told
us fascinating stories about his past life, when he backpacked in Africa to
learn more about a class of fish communicating using 'sixth sense'. Readers
speaking Russian can enjoy Matt's article on sixth sense [here](http://labs.fh
crc.org/peichel/media/pdfs/Arnegard_pdfs/Arnegard_et_al_2012_Sixth_Sense_An_El
ectric_One.pdf), while others can enjoy his wonderful video -

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/kILqK3et8OQ" frameborder="0"> </iframe>

How does this 'sixth sense' work? It is a method of communication between
electric fishes, who emit electric pulses from their body. It was found that
when two electric fishes emitting pulses of similar frequency came close to
each other, one of them raised its frequency and other one lowered its
frequency to avoid [jamming of their sense of
electroreception](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jamming_avoidance_response).

> Eigenmannia and other weakly electric fish all use active electrolocation
they can locate objects by generating an electric field and detecting
distortions in the field caused by interference from the object. Electric fish
use the electric organ to create electric fields, and they detect fields using
special electroreceptive organs in the skin.

All fish that perform JAR are wave-discharging fish that emit steady quasi-
sinusoidal discharges. For the genus Eigenmannia, frequencies range from 240
to 600 Hz. The EOD frequency is very steady, typically with less than 0.3%
variation over a 10-minute time span.

If a neighboring electric field is discharging sinusoidally close to the
fish's EOD frequency, then it will cause sensory confusion in the fish,
jamming it and preventing it from electrolocating effectively. Eigenmannia
typically are within the electric field range of three to five conspecifics at
any time. If many fish are located near each other, it would be beneficial for
each fish to distinguish between their own signal and those of others; this
can be done by increasing the frequency difference between their discharges.
Therefore it seems that the function of the JAR to avoid sensory confusion
among neighboring fish.

To determine how close the stimulus frequency is to the discharge frequency,
the fish compares the two frequencies using its electroreceptive organs,
rather than comparing the discharge frequency to an internal pacemaker; in
other words, the JAR relies only on sensory information. This was determined
experimentally by silencing a fish's electric organ with curare, and then
stimulating the fish with two external frequencies. The JAR response, measured
from the electromotor neurons in the spinal cord, depended only on the
frequencies of the external stimuli, and not on the frequency of the
pacemaker.

For more details, please check [jamming avoidance
response](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jamming_avoidance_response) and
[neuroethology](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neuroethology). Also, Matt has
several technical articles on related topics [in his
website](http://labs.fhcrc.org/peichel/people/arnegard.html).

