---
title: Vaccination, Antibiotics and Genomic Medicine
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Here we mark the years of trend-changing medical discoveries.
<!--more-->

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/01/Capture6-150x150.png)

The original debt chart is borrowed from quarterly report of [Hoisington and
Hunt](http://www.hoisingtonmgt.com/pdf/HIM2012Q2NP.pdf) and it only shows US
debt. 1873 was the peak of debt-saturated British empire and was followed by
global deflationary depression known as [long
depression](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Long_Depression). [Edit. thanks
dogfacemacgee]

\----------------------------

![Family_evicted_by_their_landlord_during_the_Irish_potato_famine](http://www.
homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2013/01
/Family_evicted_by_their_landlord_during_the_Irish_potato_famine-150x150.jpg)

["Eviction" # 1767. Irish family evicted at Moyasta, County Clare during Land
War, c.1879.](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Land_War)

\----------------------------

In that period and afterward, Germany and USA grew lot faster, whereas parts
of British empire started to become hostile
([Ireland](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Land_War), [India](http://en.wikipedia
.org/wiki/Indian_independence_movement#Rise_of_organized_movements), [South
Africa](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boer_Wars)).

Germany eventually became debt saturated and peaked around 1920-1930 Baton of
scientific discoveries was passed to USA with mass emigration during the Nazi
era. The book [Bubble that Broke the
World](http://mises.org/books/bubbleworld.pdf) written in 1932 has fascinating
depiction of debt mentality in Germany.

> She spent the borrowed money under three heads, namely: One, for housing of
all kinds; two, on her industrial machine, to rebuild it, rationalize it,
increase its power; and, three, for public works such as parks, baths, civic
and recreation centers, schools, stadiums, exposition buildings, new city
halls, new post offices, roads, even monuments.

A passion to build possessed them. Under the head of housing they completed in
the one year 1930 more than 300,000 habitations. The great weight of new
housing was for wage workers, state servants and people of moderate means. Any
new housing project in the mass principle is called a settlement. So, workers'
settlements, railway employees' settlements, post-office employees'
settlements, bachelors' settlements. But settlements also in selected places
for the well-to-do. What we should call real estate developments on a very
large scale. The aggregate is prodigious. The only way to see it really is
from the air because one settlement or one series of flat dwellings may be the
size of a town. Moreover, you would have to drive an endless distance to see
it from the ground. It is in character extensive and in new places. The cities
have not been rebuilt. They have not changed much. These people do not tear
down old things to build new ones. For new things new ground. All this change
is in the environs. The building passion overflowed necessity, became
extravagant, experimental, sportive. New time, new materials, new shapes, new
measures, new intentions. Churches all of steel and glass. The modernistic
extreme in villas, morgues, hotels, schools, skyscrapers, commercial
buildings. It was an architect's festival. Many creditors are scandalized by
the signs of Germany's extravagance with borrowed money, the French and the
English more than Americans, since they have less understanding of
extravagance in principle. The Germans admit it. They may say truthfully that
they have been heard to denounce it themselves, to one another. All the same,
they went on with it. And then, too, great sums were purposefully spent for
the future, as for a new fourth bridge across the Rhine at Cologne, now one of
the engineering marvels of Europe.

The French said: "There is no present necessity for this bridge. Why do you
build it? You do not pay reparations with a bridge."

The Germans said: "We shall sometime need it, and we build it now to keep our
people employed."

