---
title: Russia - Best Assembler, Best French Actor and now Freest Country !!
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
World has turned upside down compared to twenty years back. Earlier this year,
Putin gave passport to famous French actor Grard Depardieu, who [left France
for good calling it a Bolshevic
country](http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/forget-russias-
problems--its-france-thats-almost-bolshevik-says-grard-
depardieu-8660905.html).
<!--more-->

[French Icon Gets Star Treatmentand Job Offerin Russia](http://online.wsj.com/
article/SB10001424127887323482504578225011503083202.html)

![](http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/worldviews/files/2013/06/manning-
snowden.jpg)

Six months later, he let in the [most courageous American
Snowden](http://www.cbsnews.com/8301-202_162-57596493/edward-snowden-leaves-
airport-after-russia-grants-asylum-says-the-law-is-winning/).

[Edward Snowden leaves airport after Russia grants asylum, says "the law is
winning"](http://www.cbsnews.com/8301-202_162-57596493/edward-snowden-leaves-
airport-after-russia-grants-asylum-says-the-law-is-winning/)

Apart from those political decisions, in computing, the Russians put their
brain together to create the coolest bioinformatics site
[Rosalind](http://rosalind.info/problems/locations/), while US government
managed to get us NSA :)

To celebrate these achievements, we will run a special day for our readers and
contributors from Saint Petersburg. The following commentaries cover their
various achievements reported over the last year in our blog.

[From de Bruijn Graphs to Rectangle Graphs for Genome
Assembly](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2012/09/12/from-de-bruijn-graphs-
to-rectangle-graphs-for-genome-assembly/)

> Jigsaw puzzles were originally constructed by painting a picture on a
rectangular piece of wood and further cutting it into smaller pieces with a
jigsaw. The Jigsaw Puzzle Problem is to find an arrangement of these pieces
that fills up the rectangle in such a way that neighboring pieces have
matching boundaries with respect to color and texture. While the general
Jigsaw Puzzle Problem is NP-complete [6], we discuss its simpler version
(called Rectangle Puzzle Problem) and study the rectangle graphs, recently
introduced by Bankevich et al., 2012 [3], for assembling such puzzles. We
establish the connection between Rectangle Puzzle Problem and the problem of
assembling genomes from read-pairs, and further extend the analysis in [3] to
real challenges encountered in applications of rectangle graphs in genome
assembly. We demonstrate that addressing these challenges results in an
assembler SPAdes+ that improves on existing assembly algorithms in the case of
bacterial genomes (including particularly difficult case of genome assemblies
from single cells).

[Starting to Understand the Spades
Paper](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2012/09/17/few-thoughts-on-spades-
papers/)

[Rectangular Graph Algorithm](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2012/10/25
/rectangular-graph-algorithm/)

> Two red blocks are identical, but blue, yellow and green segments are all
different. Also, we know the pieces and their distances, but we do not have
them assembled as nicely as above. How do we assemble them?

Let us try one strategy, where we start picking pairs of positions 50
nucleotide apart and form circles. In most cases, both ends of pairs will fall
on the same colored segments, but in some cases, they will be fall on
different segments. We also know that 1,1->1,51? will be followed by
1,2->1,52? and so on. So, we have some way of connecting the pieces in a long
chain, but there are too many circles.

[Rosalind Project at Algorithmic Biology Laboratory, St.
Petersburg](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2012/09/18/rosalind-project-at-
algorithmic-biology-laboratory-st-petersburg/)

[Rosalind Will Get Even More
Marvelous](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/02/20/rosalind-will-get-even-
more-marvelous/)

> By the way, were slowing down with the current Rosalind engine development
to create a new collaborative platform for online education, which will
include all current features and more, also itll be scaled to other
disciplines (such as algorithms and coding for scientists). New platform will
be even more marvelous than Rosalind, so stay tuned :)

In indeed got more marvelous.

[SPAdes and MaSuRCA Assemblers Performed Best in GAGE-B
Evaluation](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/05/20/spades-and-masurca-
assemblers-performed-best-in-gage-b-evaluation/)

[Using Cascading Bloom Filters to Improve the Memory Usage for de Brujin
Graphs](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/07/09/using-cascading-bloom-
filters-to-improve-the-memory-usage-for-de-brujin-graphs/)

Keep up the good work !!

\--------------------------------------------------

[Edit. We are in trouble !! Our readers are complaining (by private email)
that Russia should not be called 'the freest country', Grard Depardieu should
not be called the best French actor (Alain Delon was better) and Rosalind is
partly funded by NIH. Please see additional comments.

A reader pointed out that USA is still lot better than Russia despite recent
changes. Let us cover Russia first and then USA.

**How free is Russia?** There are three aspects. 

(a) **Freedom of speech**

[yahoo answers the
question](http://answers.yahoo.com/question/index?qid=20100731005518AAAuFPM)

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/08/Capture2-300x231.png)

but then again, neither Snowden, nor Bradley Manning have freedom of speech in
USA and many others (government-funded professors) do not say many things in
public out of fear. What is different?

(b) **Freedom from taxes**

Tax code of Russia is far better than USA. So, people are free from arbitrary
seizure and loss of property in that respect.

(c) **Freedom of political refugees**, as defined by [UN convention related to
refugees](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convention_relating_to_the_Status_of_Re
fugees). We do not know how well that works in Russia except for the recent
advertised case.

\----------------------------------------

**How good is USA in comparison?** Based on our observation, USA looks good, because the American crooks are never advertised. You will enjoy the following story, because it includes all usual suspects - American academia from top university, Russia and corruption. 

[Why Larry Summers lost the presidency of
Harvard](http://mathbabe.org/2012/03/11/why-larry-summers-lost-the-presidency-
of-harvard/)

>

So why did Summers lose his job at Harvard? It was because of his protecting a
buddy, a fellow economist at Harvard named Andrei Shleifer.

Andrei Shleifer managed to get put in charge of helping Russia privatize stuff
in the mid 1990?s. His mission was to make things more useful and transparent
to the infant capitalist system. Through his wife and friends, Shleifer
instead orchestrated a boondoggle on Russia. He invested money through his
wife and helped his friend Jonathan Hay and his lover and friends invest
theirs, and set up the very first mutual fund as well as thwarting the efforts
of other people to set up their own funds. All of these things were strictly
against the conflict of interest policy they were working under.

Shleifer got in trouble, and the U.S Government sued and won against Harvard
and Shleifer. From the article:

....

**The article gets Summers fired**

An anonymous person got a bunch of copies of the II article and stuck one in
every Harvard facultys mailbox the morning of the no-confidence vote that got
Summers ousted.

And just in case youre wondering, heres the website of Sheifer, still on
faculty of Harvard.

What happened to the Summers thug? He is heading to become US treasury
secretary.

([How to understand the career trajectory of Larry
Summers](http://mathbabe.org/2013/06/28/how-to-understand-the-career-
trajectory-of-larry-summers/))

BTW, the math babe site linked above is fantastic and posts many interesting
math-related discussions.

[How much is the Stacks Project graph like a random
graph?](http://mathbabe.org/2013/08/01/how-much-is-the-stacks-project-graph-
like-a-random-graph/)

[Analyzing the complexity of the Stacks Project
graphs](http://mathbabe.org/2013/07/31/analyzing-the-complexity-of-the-stacks-
project-graphs/)

