---
title: Seven Major Trend Changes of 2013 - (vi) Business World
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
**6\. In business world, money poured into bioinformatics cloud companies, even though FDA ruled against personal genomics**
<!--more-->

In Oct 2013, a tech startup 'providing cloud services to pharmas like Pfizer',
[went public and raised $217 million](http://techcrunch.com/2013/10/16/veeva-
ipo/). The current valuation of the company is nearly $4 billion. That is not
a small sum of money, given that the [entire budget of National Science
Foundation of USA is only $7.4
billion](http://www.nsf.gov/about/budget/fy2013/).

Everywhere we see evidence of money pouring into all kinds of bioinformatics
companies. For example, from today's news,

[Tute Genomics Raises $1.5M for Cloud-based Genome Analytics & Machine-
learning for Gene Discovery](http://ca.finance.yahoo.com/news/tute-genomics-
raises-1-5m-220500706.html)

> Tute Genomics announced that it has raised $1.5 million in Seed Round
funding to further develop its advanced genome analysis software, allowing
researchers to rapidly discover novel disease genes & identify predictive
biomarkers. Investors in this round include Wilmington Pharmatech, Salt Lake
Life Sciences Angels, Peak Ventures, Park City Angel Network, and a number of
individual angel investors. Tute Genomics participated in the BoomStartup
accelerator program in Utah this year, and subsequently raised the most funds
of any company in BoomStartup's history. Additionally, Tute raised
approximately $300K from AngelList, via their new Syndicate mechanism.

All these suggests that maybe we are happily converging on to world of
personalized medicine and personal genomics [forecast by Francis Collins since
around 1999](http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJM199907013410106), or are
we?

>

A HYPOTHETICAL CASE IN 2010

General visions of gene-based medicine in the future are useful, but many
health care providers are probably still puzzled by how it will affect the
daily practice of medicine in a primary care setting. A hypothetical clinical
encounter in 2010 is described here.

John, a 23-year-old college graduate, is referred to his physician because a
serum cholesterol level of 255 mg per deciliter was detected in the course of
a medical examination required for employment. He is in good health but has
smoked one pack of cigarettes per day for six years. Aided by an interactive
computer program that takes Johns family history, his physician notes that
there is a strong paternal history of myocardial infarction and that Johns
father died at the age of 48 years.

To obtain more precise information about his risks of contracting coronary
artery disease and other illnesses in the future, John agrees to consider a
battery of genetic tests that are available in 2010. After working through an
interactive computer program that explains the benefits and risks of such
tests, John agrees (and signs informed consent) to undergo 15 genetic tests
that provide risk information for illnesses for which preventive strategies
are available. He decides against an additional 10 tests involving disorders
for which no clinically validated preventive interventions are yet available.

Johns subsequent counseling session with the physician and a genetic nurse
specialist focuses on the conditions for which his risk differs substantially
(by a factor of more than two) from that of the general population. Like most
patients, John is interested in both his relative risk and his absolute risk.

John is pleased to learn that genetic testing does not always give bad news
his risks of contracting prostate cancer and Alzheimers disease are reduced,
because he carries low-risk variants of the several genes known in 2010 to
contribute to these illnesses. But John is sobered by the evidence of his
increased risks of contracting coronary artery disease, colon cancer, and lung
cancer. Confronted with the reality of his own genetic data, he arrives at
that crucial teachable moment when a lifelong change in health-related
behavior, focused on reducing specific risks, is possible. And there is much
to offer. By 2010, the field of pharmacogenomics has blossomed, and a
prophylactic drug regimen based on the knowledge of Johns personal genetic
data can be precisely prescribed to reduce his cholesterol level and the risk
of coronary artery disease to normal levels. His risk of colon cancer can be
addressed by beginning a program of annual colonoscopy at the age of 45, which
in his situation is a very cost-effective way to avoid colon cancer. His
substantial risk of contracting lung cancer provides the key motivation for
him to join a support group of persons at genetically high risk for serious
complications of smoking, and he successfully kicks the habit.

In a surprise December 2013 reversal, FDA banned personal genomics company 23
and Me to stop doing exactly what Francis Collins forecast they would do by
this time. From the CNN report,

[FDA orders genetic testing firm 23 and Me to halt
sales](http://money.cnn.com/2013/11/25/technology/fda-23andme/)

> The Food and Drug Administration has ordered genetic testing firm 23andMe to
stop sales of its home-testing kits, saying the Google-backed company has
failed to prove the validity of its product.

.....

23andMe offers $99 saliva-testing kits that customers use at home and then
send to the company for reports on their heritage, their receptiveness to
medications and their genetic risk for dozens of health conditions.

"Strike back before cancer has a chance to strike," the California-based
company says on its website.

But in a letter dated Friday and posted on its website, the FDA said that
despite extensive correspondence with 23andMe, regulators "still do not have
any assurance that the firm has analytically or clinically validated the
[personal genome service] for its intended uses."

Some would argue that the 23 and Me case is an exception to the trend of
convergence toward personalized medicine, but the last paragraph of the above
report suggests it is not. Can a personal genomics company use the results
from high-visibility publications from Genome Wide Association Studies to warn
people of disease risk? Is the FDA suggesting that the extensive amount of
discoveries reported from Genome Wide Association Studies (#GWAS) are mostly
garbage for clinical use? FDA's ban of 23 and Me puts a big question mark on
the entire paradigm promoted by Francis Collins. Possibly it qualifies as a
major trend change and we will learn more in the coming years.

Coming up next -

[Seven Major Trend Changes of 2013 (vii) Larger
Society](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/01/01/vii/)

