---
title: A Cuban Blog on Bioinformatics and Proteomics
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
![](http://2.bp.blogspot.com/-4XcOkPjB30c/UkrpU-
ryHxI/AAAAAAAAEhE/dRW4OLg6YFU/s320/5295_1207251979102_4854142_n.jpg)
<!--more-->

Yasset Perez-Riverol, who works as a bioinformatician in Cuba, contacted us by
email to mention his informative blog that our readers may enjoy. Below we
provide links to couple of his commentaries. Please feel free to give feedback
to him here or in his blog.

[Celebrating Ten Years of Mann and Aebersolds Mass spectrometry-based
proteomics review](http://computationalproteomic.blogspot.com/2013/10/ten-
years-of-mass-spectrometry-based.html)

> In 2003 Mann & Aebersold reviewed on the pages of Nature the challenges and
perspectives of the then-nascent field of MS-based proteomics. Mass
spectrometry (MS) has since entrenched itself as the method of choice for
analyzing complex protein samples, and MS-based proteomics has become an
indispensable technology for interpreting genomic data and performing protein
analyses (primary sequence, post-translational modifications (PTMs) or
proteinprotein interactions).

"The ability of mass spectrometry to identify and, increasingly, to precisely
quantify thousands of proteins from complex samples can be expected to impact
broadly on biology and medicine."

The manuscript by Mann & Aebersold is one of the most cited manuscripts in the
field of MS proteomics, For this reason is one of the core papers in the field
of proteomics and computational proteomics, outlining most of the basic
concepts required to understand the fundamentals of this discipline.

[Why R for Mass Spectrometrist and Computational
Proteomics](http://computationalproteomic.blogspot.com/2012/08/why-r-for-mass-
spectrometrist-and.html)

>

Why R:

Actually, It is a common practice the integration of the statistical analysis
of the resulted data and in silico predictions of the data generated in your
manuscript and your daily research. Mass spectrometrist, biologist and
bioinformaticians commonly use programs like excel, calc or other office tools
to generate their charts and statistical analysis. In recent years many
computational biologists especially those from the Genomics field, regard R
and Bioconductor as fundamental tools for their research.

R is a modern, functional programming language that allows for rapid
development of ideas; it is a language and environment for statistical
computing and graphics.The rich set of inbuilt functions makes it ideal for
high-volume analysis or statistical studies.

We find it quite fascinating that scientific researchers from around the world
are using the internet to get connected to each other and share ideas without
going through the journals acting as intermediaries. That means there will be
a continuum in the modes of communications and all scales, ranging from short
tweets all the way up to journal publications in highly polished languages,
will be seen as viable means of communication.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/G_GBwuYuOOs" frameborder="0"> </iframe>
