---
title: 'Science Reporting: a New Trend Emerges'
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
It is quite unusual to find [Economist
magazine](http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21588069-scientific-research-
has-changed-world-now-it-needs-change-itself-how-science-goes-wrong) starting
an attack on scientists, while journals like
[Nature](http://www.nature.com/news/reproducibility-the-risks-of-the-
replication-drive-1.14184) and [Cell](http://news.cell.com/cellreports/cell-
reports/in-defense-of-science) go on the defensive. Science reporting by
mainstream media seems to have entered a new phase.
<!--more-->

**Early Days of Science Reporting by Media**

When we were PhD students, scientists had very little interaction with the
media. We tried to follow Feynman's philosophy (please see ["Cargo Cult
Science"](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2012/08/21/cargo-cult-science/)),
where he expressly forbade scientists to do 'advertising' and 'marketing'
(synonymous to 'lying') regarding their work. We remember only one professor
from our physics department being chased by the media, because his paper
explained how the baseball bat worked. It was one of his side projects and he
took the extra attention with some level of discomfort and embarrassment. It
was quite different atmosphere compared to today, when blogs ask scientists to
embrace marketing (e.g. ["In Defense Of Marketing: Life Scientists Should
Embrace, Not Eschew It"](http://comprendia.com/2013/10/10/in-defense-of-life-
science-marketing/) ).

**Post-2000: Papers Came out with Press Releases**

The biggest shift came after 2000, when the government allocated large chunk
of extra money to genomics and especially human genomics for no good reason.
Almost every paper wanted to get published in Science or Nature, every
publication 'revealed' new secret of nature (check ["Shocking Finding that a
Genome by Itself Provides Little
Insight"](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/06/05/shocking-finding-that-
genomes-by-themselves-provide-little-insight/) for a large collection of
revealing titles) and every paper came out with a grandiose press release.

How did the scientists get access to the media? Usually after a paper got
accepted in Science, Nature or Cell, the journals set up interviews with
friendly science reporters. The 'science reporter' knew very little science
and was deferential toward the supposedly super-intelligent person (judged by
pedigree), aka scientist. The scientist could feed her with any cock and bull
story. Most older scientists chose not to, but younger ones were often trained
differently.

**2013: Scientists in Trouble**

The sands seem to have shifted again. We are noticing the emergence of more
aggressive mainstream media, which does not want to remain deferential toward
the scientists. We already linked to the Economist commentary. LA Times also
published an article complaining about the lack of replication. Slate magazine
chose to go fully hostile, as you can see from the tones of many commentaries.

[Genetics Rite of Passage - Find a gene, slap high-fives around the lab,
publish to huzzahs, and then uh-oh.](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_
science/human_genome/2013/10/human_genetics_successes_and_failures_ashg_storie
s_of_disease_genes.html)

> But many of the tweetsor any frank geneticistwill also tell you stories of
struggle and confusion: The current list of cancer-risk genes, the detection
of which leads some people to have real organs removed, likely contains many
false positives, even as standard diagnostic sequencing techniques are missing
many disease-causing mutations. Theres a real possibility that the majority of
cancer predisposition genes in databases are wrong. And a sharp team of
geneticists just last week cleanly dismantled a hyped study from last year
that claimed to find a genetic signature of autism clear enough to diagnose
the risk of it in unborn children.

This sample reads like an abstract of the entire field of genetics. In
researching a book about genetics over the past four years, Ive found a field
that stands in a bizarre but lovely state of confusiontaken aback, but eager
to advance; balanced tenuously between wild ambition and a deep but troubling
humility. In the 13 years since the sequencing of the first human genome, the
field has solved puzzles that 14 years ago seemed hopeless. Yet geneticists
with any historical memory hold a painful awareness that their field has
fallen short of the glory that seemed close at hand when Francis Collins,
Craig Venter, and Bill Clinton announced their apparent triumph in June 2000.

[Is Junk DNA Really Junky? The delicious, religious debate over what most of
our genome is good for](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/human
_genome/2013/10/junk_dna_debate_critics_of_the_encode_project_cite_humped_blad
derwort.2.html)

> These high expectations for noncoding DNA peaked last fall thanks to an
ambitious project known as ENCODE. It set out to catalogue every last bit of
noncoding DNA in the human genome. It cost $288 million and produced a
supernova burst of 30 scientific papers last September, including an overview
article in Nature with 442 co-authors. Given its size and scope, ENCODE
covered a lot. But its leaders trumpeted one main finding above all: that 80
percent of noncoding DNA had some sort of biological function. This was like
Columbus discovering five new continents at oncewhole new worlds of unexpected
genetic activity and potential therapeutic targets to exploit. If the Human
Genome Project deflated hopes about genetic medicine, ENCODE pumped them right
back up.

All the while, however, a few scientists were grumbling about ENCODE, and in a
slew of papers from earlier this year, they argued that ENCODE was vastly
overselling itself.

And what is this? Saint Francis (Collins) is not a saint anymore?

[Watch Francis Collins Lunge for the Nobel Prize - An underhanded attempt by
the National Institutes of Health to claim full credit for sequencing the
human genome](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/human_genome/20
13/10/human_genome_sequence_anniversary_celera_and_frances_collins_nih_are_sti
ll.html)

> Why in the world are the National Institutes of Health and the Smithsonian
Institution celebrating the 10th anniversary of the sequencing of the human
genome this year?

They didnt miss a deadline or mess up the math. By designating 2003 as the
year the genome was sequenced, the NIH is still fighting against Celera. Its
laying exclusive claim for credit and trying to push its rival out of the
history books. Its trying to give the leaders of the public consortium an edge
in the battle for the inevitable Nobel Prize.The Celera genome paper had more
than 200 authors, and the International Human Genome Sequencing Consortiums
paper listed more than 300, from 25 institutions. The Nobel Prize can be split
only three ways.

Is creating another organization to independently replicate all experiment the
solution? In twitter, we had several exchanges with @pathogenomenick and
others, where we sided with Mina Bissell, the author of Nature commentary. In
part II, we will explain our reasoning and discuss what the scientists can do
get the genie back into the bottle.

