---
title: 'Opinion: &lsquo;Big science&rsquo;, big hype, big mistake'
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
![Bill Amos](http://www.zoo.cam.ac.uk/zoostaff/images/AMOS.JPG)
<!--more-->

[A thoughtful opinion
piece](http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/comment/opinion/opinion-big-
science-big-hype-big-mistake/2005124.article) by Bill Amos was published on
UK's Times Higher Education.

> Not long ago, the Nobel prizewinning scientist James Watson, co-discoverer
of the structure of DNA, made a wry comment in a seminar. It went something
like this: If you are not in a big research group, think about packing your
bags to leave science. It is a view that is reinforced by the governments
plans to sequence 100,000 human genomes, but clashes with a recent Radio 4
discussion on Start the Week that pointed out how the promises used to sell
big science are, by and large, pie in the sky.

For genome sequencing, the gold at the end of the rainbow usually involves
cures for cancer, used to justify the first genome sequence, the 1,000 Genomes
project and now 100,000 more. These promises were made before and will no
doubt be made again, apparently without even a backward glance at whether they
were fulfilled.

As a geneticist, I should surely welcome such projects, but I do not.

The sentiment echoes many of our earlier commentaries, and we are happy to
find out that other researchers are finally starting to see the big cancer
funding projects as cancer on productive science. In retrospect, it is quite
unbelievable that the biologists manages to play 'give us money and we will
cure cancer in 5 years' con game for nearly 45 years with increasing success
!!

[Is 1000 Genome Project an Example of Modern Day
Alchemy?](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2012/04/03/is-1000-genome-project-
an-example-of-modern-day-alchemy/)

[Personalized Medicine and BRCA Case
Study](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/03/09/personalized-medicine-and-
brca-story/)

[Cancer Genomics and Parable of Streetlight
Effect](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/05/22/cancer-genomics-and-
parable-of-streetlight-effect/)

[Why Waste 3 Billion Dollars on Human Brain Activity Map Alchemy
Project?](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/02/25/why-waste-3-billion-
dollars-on-human-brain-activity-map-alchemy-project/)

\-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------
-------
