---
title: Notes on PacBio-based Assembly of Plasmodium 3D7
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
[Black Artist](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/06/07/de-novo-nssembly-
is-not-at-all-black-art/) Jason Chin sent us his notes on assembly of
Plasmodium genome that readers will find helpful. You can download the entire
document with scripts from [here](http://figshare.com/articles/Plasmodium_3D7_
Genome_Assembly_With_PacBio_Data_and_CLEAR_/712587).
<!--more-->

Here are four text documents from him:

1\. [A Computation Note for Assembling Plasmodium 3D7 with CLEAR, Part I](http
://nbviewer.ipython.org/url/files.figshare.com/1075540/P3D7_CLEAR_NOTE.ipynb)

> Plasmodium is a parasite that causes malaria. Understanding its genetics
will help to find a cure to the disease. From the sequencing technology point
of view, it posts a great challenge to sequence and assembly the genome. Due
to its very in-balanced AT/GC content (AT ~= 80% and GC ~=20%), most sequence
technology can not produce good and long sequences that enables assembling the
genome into long contigs. For example, the earlier publication using 2nd
geneneration sequence technology can only get contig N50 about 1 to 4 kbp (BMC
Genomics. 2011; 12: 116, http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/116). (See
other related assembly statistics from http://www.broadinstitute.org/annotatio
n/genome/plasmodium_falciparum_spp/AssemblyStats.html) Using Sanger sequencing
technology will get a better results of which the contig N50 is about 10 to
20kb. Here we demostrate that using PacBio(R) RS Single Molecule Real-Time
(SMRT(R)) sequencing technology, we can easily assemble the genome much better
results (N50 ~= 954kb about 43x of the) than the earlier 2nd gen. sequencing
results even with some simple home-made assembly code.

If you want pdf version of the above article, [please check
here](http://files.figshare.com/1075538/P3D7_CLEAR_NOTE.pdf).

2\. [A Computation Note for Assembling Plasmodium 3D7 with CLEAR, Part II](htt
p://nbviewer.ipython.org/url/files.figshare.com/1075534/P3D7_CLEAR_NOTE_P2.ipy
nb)

Same in [pdf
version](http://files.figshare.com/1075538/P3D7_CLEAR_NOTE_P2.pdf).

