---
title: RNA-seq Data on Prostate Cancer Publicly Available from BGI
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
[A comment from reader
dogfacemacgee](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/06/07/a-rabbi-a-priest-
and-a-minister-walk-into-a-bar/) is informative enough so that we made it a
main post.
<!--more-->

>

The Chicoms are actually releasing real sequence for patients BGI has put RNA-
seq for Prostate cancer into SRA
[here](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/?term=%28RNA-seq%20analysis%20of
%20prostate%20cancer%20in%20the%20Chinese%20population%29%20AND%20bioproject_s
ra\[filter\]%20NOT%20bioproject_gap\[filter\]).

The study is RNA-seq analysis of prostate cancer in the Chinese population
identifies recurrent gene fusions, cancer-associated long noncoding RNAs and
aberrant alternative splicings [ PMID : 22349460 ]

The reads coverage actually viewable at NCIs Cancer Genome Workbench (CGWB) :
[here](https://cgwb.nci.nih.gov/cgi-
bin/hgTracks?BGI_Prostate=full&db=hg19&position=chr19:49,259,724-51,597,180).

or [TP53](https://cgwb.nci.nih.gov/cgi-bin/bambino?chr=chr17;project=238;start
=7571719;end=7590868;sample=X011359_14N&c=chr17&l=7571719&r=7590868&db=hg19).

The aligned sequence reads are viewable by zooming in and using the bambino
tool available with a right mouse click (bambino view details) if you have
java example : [here](https://cgwb.nci.nih.gov/cgi-bin/bambino?chr=chr17;proje
ct=238;start=7571719;end=7590868;sample=X011359_14N&c=chr17&l=7571719&r=759086
8&db=hg19).

With the patient protections in the capitalist countries, perhaps its the
communists who can open source disease data.

We hear about similar issues, when we talk to cancer researchers at Fred Hutch
and University of Washington. Each hospital around USA got some amount of
cancer data from their respective patients, but their real value comes from
aggregating all data and looking for rare marker. However, they cannot search
in the entire collection of data for disease markers, because a huge
bureaucracy is created to protect 'patient privacy', and doing anything to
keep them happy is extremely expensive. [Going by the argument of Titus
Brown](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/06/10/titus-brown-offers-new-
class-on-internet-realities/), privacy is impossible to achieve for internet
users, because that distorts 'internet reality' for ad distributors. However,
when it comes to real research, privacy is utterly important.

Cui bono?

