---
title: Minimal Genome
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
We do not like to channel NY Times here, but [a
column](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/04/science/how-simple-can-life-get-its-
complicated.html?_r=0) by Carl Zimmer is well written.
<!--more-->

>

One species, Mycoplasma genitalium, turned out to have a mere 475 genes one-
fiftieth the number in our own set.

For years, M. genitalium held the record for the smallest genome. (Scientists
dont allow viruses into this contest, since viruses cant grow and reproduce on
their own.) But in recent years, M. genitalium has lost its minimalist crown.
Today, the record-holder is a microbe called Tremblaya princeps, which
contains only 120 protein-coding genes.

Have we found the minimal genome at last? The answer, once again, is no. But
the reason for that reveals something else intriguing about life.

He continues to discuss a recently published study on horizontal gene
transfer, where Tremblaya survives by sharing its work with another microbe
and the host mealybug.

[Horizontal Gene Transfer from Diverse Bacteria to an Insect Genome Enables a
Tripartite Nested Mealybug
Symbiosis](http://www.cell.com/retrieve/pii/S0092867413006466)

> The smallest reported bacterial genome belongs to Tremblaya princeps, a
symbiont of Planococcus citri mealybugs (PCIT). Tremblaya PCIT not only has a
139 kb genome, but possesses its own bacterial endosymbiont, Moranella
endobia. Genome and transcriptome sequencing, including genome sequencing from
a Tremblaya lineage lacking intracellular bacteria, reveals that the extreme
genomic degeneracy of Tremblaya PCIT likely resulted from acquiring Moranella
as an endosymbiont. In addition, at least 22 expressed horizontally
transferred genes from multiple diverse bacteria to the mealybug genome likely
complement missing symbiont genes. However, none of these horizontally
transferred genes are from Tremblaya, showing that genome reduction in this
symbiont has not been enabled by gene transfer to the host nucleus. Our
results thus indicate that the functioning of this three-way symbiosis is
dependent on genes from at least six lineages of organisms and reveal a path
to intimate endosymbiosis distinct from that followed by organelles.

For other parts of NY Times, you can [use this computer
program](http://thomasfriedmanopedgenerator.com/about.php).

