---
title: 'At #baltibio - Torsten Seemann''s Bioinformatics Programs and TGAC'
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
We encourage readers to follow hashtag #baltibio in Twitter to learn about the
discussions at an exciting meeting of bioinformaticians in UK. Following
topics stood out:
<!--more-->

**Prokka from Torsten Seemann**

Torsten Seemann from Victorian Bioinformatics Consortium at [Monash
University, Australia](http://www.vicbioinformatics.com/), presented on
[Prokka](http://www.vicbioinformatics.com/software.prokka.shtml), VAGUE,
Nesoni and VelvetOptimiser, etc. Prokka got the most mentions in #baltibio.

> Prokka is a software tool for the rapid annotation of prokaryotic genomes. A
typical 4 Mbp genome can be fully annotated in less than 10 minutes on a quad-
core computer. It produces GFF, GBK and SQN files that are ready for editing
in Sequin and ultimately submitted to Genbank/DDJB/ENA.

Few #baltibio claims: (h/t @pathogenomenick)

1\. Around 50% of any random genome can be annotated against Prokka's core
proteome db which has 70k annotations with exp evidence.

2\. The NCBI non-redundant protein database is actually quite redundant, and
contains plenty of garbage as not policed.

3\. NCBI PGAAP annotation tool can take weeks to get results back, in one case
took six months!

4\. Torsten uses Shrimp for read mapping in Nesoni as he finds it much more
sensitive for indels than eg BWA.

**TGAC - the Biggest Bioinformatics Data Analysis Powerhouse**

Rob Davey presented on TGAC and you can see his slides
[here](http://www.tgac.ac.uk/uploads/presentations/tgac_tools-
baltibioinfo-20130520-final.pdf).

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/05/Capture27-300x225.png)

1\. [UK's TGAC](http://www.tgac.ac.uk/) has a UV2000 with 2560 cores, 20TB RAM
as well as nearly every instrument known to man !! @pathogenomenick.

2\. TGAC get 25x speed improvement running bwa in an FPGA. @scalene

3\. TGAC came up with an [open source browser](http://tgac-
browser.tgac.ac.uk/) that is supposedly very good. h/t: @lexnederberg

> TGAC Browser is a new open-souce Genomic Browser developed at The Genome
Analysis Centre (TGAC) to visualise genome annotation from Ensembl Database
Schema.

There were many other talks and discussion that you will find at Twitter
#baltibio. We will cover Jared Simpson's SGA in a separate commentary, but
please check [this @storify link](http://storify.com/ctitusbrown/balti-and-
bioinformatics-nextgen-sequencing-in-the) to know about #baltibio discussions
on his work.

