---
title: The Eroding Premium on Truth and Trust
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
_The premium in America has shifted from truth to self-serving distortion, and
from trust to manipulation._
<!--more-->

Charles Hugh Smith is the most insightful social commentator of recent era we
came across. Although [his current
commentary](http://charleshughsmith.blogspot.com/2013/04/the-eroding-premium-
on-truth-and-trust.html) is more directed to finance and banking, we believe
it applies to ENCODE and other government-backed big science projects as well.
If science journals are not seeking truth any more, are they merely collection
of marketing brochures?

>

We pay a premium for trust because the cost of dishonesty and artifice is
steep.Would you pay more to buy a used car from someone you trust? If you
place no premium on trustworthiness, then you buy the "great deal" used car
you found online: oops, the "new" battery was spray-painted black, the
crankcase leaks, the engine is shot and doesn't pass smog, and the certificate
of ownership is forged.

.....

Manipulation and carefully crafted distortion erode trust, not just in the
individuals employed to repeat the lies but in the institutions that issue
them. The ruthless pursuit of self-interest is now the norm; truth is a
terribly risky disruptor that must be hidden, masked or countered with
plausible lies.

As a nation, we're like the obese person who looks at himself in the mirror
and sees his body as normal--the distortion of truth is so complete that we
literally no longer recognize reality. Untruth no longer arouses any moral
indignation; we are either too jaded to care, or our moral compass now spins
aimlessly from one manipulation to the next.

There can be no trust if there is no truth. How can we trust people who lie to
us constantly, who issue one self-serving justification after another for
their own parasitic predation? We cannot. How can we trust institutions whose
credibility now rests on the continuation of lies that are so embedded in our
financial sector and State that their collapse will bring down the entire
house-of-cards debtocracy? We cannot.

