---
title: New Announcements from Ion Torrent and Oxford Nanopore
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
**Ion Torrent**
<!--more-->

Sequencing companies are making new announcements during ASHG. Two days back,
Ion Torrent and BGI jointly announced that BGI would get 37 new Proton
machines. Omics Omics blog posted a nice summary of what the company is up to
lately -

[Ion Previews More Accurate Polymerase, Faster Template
Prep](http://omicsomics.blogspot.com/2013/10/ion-previews-more-accurate-
polymerase.html)

> The Ion team reached out to me and invited me to come down to Ion World
(conveniently across town) and chat frankly about their new HiQ chemistry.
While I had been napping, Ion had pushed the read lengths on the PGM to 400
basepairs, but indels still dogged them, as seen in various public comparisons
of sequencing platforms. The HiQ enzyme has two mutations engineered in which
improve fidelity. Systematic indel errors are reduced by 90%, to 0.027%, with
strand biases in errors markedly reduced. They did confess to me that they
have not yet tried the system in the G+C extreme zone I work in (>70%).

....

Ion has experimented with a number of ways to reach out to their users in
unusual ways, and the [new program of enabling early technology
access](http://ioncommunity.lifetechnologies.com/docs/DOC-8261) to anyone is
certainly an interesting twist. Most early access programs target a select few
partners at large genome centers. Sometimes one can get connected through
professional networks (that's how Warp got a crack at Moleculo when they were
in stealth mode). but other times one simply strikes out (for various reasons
I won't list all the companies that have resisted my entreaties). Ion takes a
risk that early versions won't perform; they are betting that the early users
will understand the preliminary nature of what they are getting and will find
exciting new uses for them.

The official press release from the company can be found
[here](http://ir.lifetechnologies.com/releasedetail.cfm?ReleaseID=798937). We
looked around for user experiences on Ion Torrent machines and found an [old
thread at seqanswers](http://seqanswers.com/forums/showthread.php?t=24580) and
several other early commentaries from Omics Omics blog
([here](http://omicsomics.blogspot.com/2011/12/reflecting-on-year-of-ion-
torrent.html), [here](http://omicsomics.blogspot.com/2011/05/ion-torrents-
data-quality-is-pretty.html) and somewhat related
[here](http://omicsomics.blogspot.com/2012/01/does-illlmina-also-have-
homopolymer.html)). Hopefully, with renewed interest from BGI and others, we
will get to hear more discussions on Ion instruments.

**Oxford Nanopore**

We like to say good things about this company, but were horrified to find
[Ewan Birney mentioned as a member of their scientific advisory
board](http://omicsomics.blogspot.com/2012/02/oxford-nanopore-doesnt-
disappoint.html) in [a commentary at Omics Omics
blog](http://omicsomics.blogspot.com/2012/02/oxford-nanopore-doesnt-
disappoint.html) !! Someone lying on the abstract of a major scientific paper
is not a scientist.

Maybe good senses prevailed at Oxford Nanopore, because Ewan's name is nowhere
[in their current website](https://www.nanoporetech.com/about-us/team
/technology-advisory-board). ONP is announcing an early access program with
details being available [here](https://www.nanoporetech.com/technology/the-
minion-device-a-miniaturised-sensing-system/minion-access-programme).

> In late November, Oxford Nanopore will open registration for a MinION Access
Programme (MAP - product preview). This is a substantial but initially
controlled programme designed to give life science researchers access to
nanopore sequencing technology at no risk and minimal cost.

MAP participants will be at the forefront of applying a completely novel,
long-read, real-time sequencing system to existing and new application areas.
MAP participants will gain hands-on understanding of the MinION technology,
its capabilities and features. They will also play an active role in assessing
and developing the system over time. Oxford Nanopore believes that any life
science researcher can and should be able to exploit MinION in their own work.
Accordingly, Oxford Nanopore is accepting applications for MAP participation
from all1, 2.

About the programme

A substantial number of selected participants will receive a MinION Access
programme package. This will include:

At least one complete MinION system (device, flowcells and software tools).

MAP participants will be asked to pay a refundable $1,000 deposit on the
MinION USB device, plus shipping.

Oxford Nanopore will provide a regular baseline supply of flowcells sufficient
to allow frequent usage of the system. MAP participants will ONLY pay shipping
costs on these flowcells. Any additional flowcells required at the
participants' discretion may be available for purchase at a MAP-only price of
$999 each plus shipping and taxes.

Oxford Nanopore will provide Sequencing Preparation Kits. MAP participants may
choose to develop their own sample preparation and analysis methods; however,
at this stage on an unsupported basis.

