---
title: Genomic evidence for ameiotic evolution Adineta vaga
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Democratization of genome sequencing has given power to researchers asking all
kinds of interesting biological question, and not limiting genomics to what
the bureaucrats at cancer agency think would be good for their [cure cancer by
2015 propaganda](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/War_on_Cancer). Here is a
fascinating paper from an international collaboration led by a French group.
<!--more-->

[Genomic evidence for ameiotic evolution in the bdelloid rotifer Adineta vaga]
(http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/nature12326.html)

> Loss of sexual reproduction is considered an evolutionary dead end for
metazoans, but bdelloid rotifers challenge this view as they appear to have
persisted asexually for millions of years1. Neither male sex organs nor
meiosis have ever been observed in these microscopic animals: oocytes are
formed through mitotic divisions, with no reduction of chromosome number and
no indication of chromosome pairing2. However, current evidence does not
exclude that they may engage in sex on rare, cryptic occasions. Here we report
the genome of a bdelloid rotifer, Adineta vaga (Davis, 1873)3, and show that
its structure is incompatible with conventional meiosis. At gene scale, the
genome of A. vaga is tetraploid and comprises both anciently duplicated
segments and less divergent allelic regions. However, in contrast to sexual
species, the allelic regions are rearranged and sometimes even found on the
same chromosome.

Such structure does not allow meiotic pairing; instead, we find abundant
evidence of gene conversion, which may limit the accumulation of deleterious
mutations in the absence of meiosis. Gene families involved in resistance to
oxidation, carbohydrate metabolism and defence against transposons are
significantly expanded, which may explain why transposable elements cover only
3% of the assembled sequence. Furthermore, 8% of the genes are likely to be of
non-metazoan origin and were probably acquired horizontally. This apparent
convergence between bdelloids and prokaryotes sheds new light on the
evolutionary significance of sex.

What do we like?

1\. Use of MIRA+SSPACE assembler - that is non-mainstream for genome papers.

2\. Genome assembly alone led to interesting findings. Fig.3 - "A genome
structure incompatible with conventional meiosis" covers their main point.

3\. Very low amount (3%) of transposons in the genome.

4\. The term 'ohnologous' getting more accepted.

5\. HOX:

> We found that A. vaga includes many more homeobox gene families with four
copies than are seen in other animals, including vertebrates that have
undergone two rounds of genome

duplication and even the zebrafish that has undergone an additional round
(Supplementary

Fig. 21). This inordinate maintenance of four gene copies likely points to
constraints on gene

balance during embryogenesis counterselecting the independent loss of gene
copies is

counterselected.

The paper is full of interesting nuggets and is worth taking a look. We will
add to the commentary as we continue to read through it.

