---
title: Rules for Copying&#47;Reposting our Blog Posts (CC BY-NC)
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
In twitter, we noticed some commotion about [an aggregation site](http://www
.bioinfo-bloggers.com/en/2013/11/05/collection-of-published-guides-for-
bioinformaticians/) posting materials from various bioinfo sites.
<!--more-->

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/11/Capture5-300x197.png)

We are releasing the content of our blog pages of homolog.us with [CC BY-NC
license](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.0/). The
[tutorials](http://www.homolog.us/Tutorials/) are NOT released under the same
license. We will soon post the legal documents at the bottoms to clarify the
point.

Details of CC BY-NC can be found [here](http://creativecommons.org/licenses
/by-nc/2.0/).

> You are free:

to Share to copy, distribute and transmit the work

to Remix to adapt the work

Under the following conditions:

Attribution You must attribute the work in the manner specified by the author
or licensor (but not in any way that suggests that they endorse you or your
use of the work).

Noncommercial You may not use this work for commercial purposes.

With the understanding that:

Waiver Any of the above conditions can be waived if you get permission from
the copyright holder.

Public Domain Where the work or any of its elements is in the public domain
under applicable law, that status is in no way affected by the license.

Other Rights In no way are any of the following rights affected by the
license:

Your fair dealing or fair use rights, or other applicable copyright exceptions
and limitations;

The author's moral rights;

Rights other persons may have either in the work itself or in how the work is
used, such as publicity or privacy rights.

Notice For any reuse or distribution, you must make clear to others the
license terms of this work. The best way to do this is with a link to this web
page.

A new version of this license is available. You should use it for new works,
and you may want to relicense existing works under it. No works are
automatically put under the new license, however.

\-------------------------------------------------------

We usually ask, when we post materials from others and was surprised to find
how much is posted with CC BY-NC or other versions of Creative Commons
license.

For example:

[BioMedCentral, GigaScience, Genome Biology,
etc.](http://www.biomedcentral.com/about/license)

> BioMed Central Open Access license agreement

Brief summary of the agreement

Anyone is free:

to copy, distribute, and display the work;

to make derivative works;

to make commercial use of the work;

Under the following conditions: Attribution

the original author must be given credit;

for any reuse or distribution, it must be made clear to others what the
license terms of this work are;

any of these conditions can be waived if the authors gives permission.

Statutory fair use and other rights are in no way affected by the above.

Full BioMed Central Open Access license agreement

(Identical to the 'Creative Commons Attribution License')

[PLOS One](http://www.plosone.org/static/terms;jsessionid=8A88B072BEF5ED7C9465
ADEEE523121E)

> Reproduction of Articles

All articles and accompanying materials published by PLOS on PLOS Sites,
unless otherwise indicated, are licensed by the respective authors of such
articles for use and distribution by you subject to citation of the original
source in accordance with the Creative Commons Attribution License.

[Nature (only some
articles)](http://www.nature.com/authors/policies/license.html)

> In December 2007, NPG introduced the Creative Commons attribution-non
commercial-share alike unported licence for those articles in Nature journals
that are publishing the primary sequence of an organism's genome for the first
time. In summary, under this type of licence, readers are free to share (copy,
distribute and transmit) and remix (adapt) the contribution under these
conditions: attribution in the manner specified by the author or licenser;
non-commercial readers and users cannot re-use the material for commercial
purposes; and share alike if readers or other users alter, transform or build
upon the work, they may distribute this work only under the same or similar
licence to this one. Further details of the licence and of the legal code are
available.

A Nature Editorial introducing this service can be read here: comments are
welcome at Nautilus, our author blog.

All articles in NPG's open-access journal Molecular Systems Biology are
published under a Creative Commons attribution-non commercial-share alike
unported licence or a non commercial-no derivs licence, at the choice of the
authors. Please see the Molecular Systems Biology website for more
information, and visit The Seven Stones, the Molecular Systems Biology blog,
for online discussion of this policy.

Articles published at Nature Communications under open access and all those
published at Scientific Reports are published under the same Creative Commons
licences as detailed for Molecular Systems Biology. Please see the licence
section on the Nature Communications and Scientific Reports websites for more
information.

