---
title: BGI&rsquo;s Youth Culture
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
We earlier posted about 'BGI Model'
[here](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/09/21/bgi-model/) and
[here](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2013/02/07/bgi-it-is-the-wild-west-of-
genomics/), and received insightful comments from Ruibang, Kevin Chen and
other readers. Nature blog [posted a good
interview](http://blogs.nature.com/tradesecrets/2013/04/19/bgis-youth-
movement) with BGI's executive director Dr. Wang further elaborating on BGI's
'youth movement'. BGI currently has over 4,000 employees split between BGI
Research (academic non-profit research), BGI Tech (genomics and omics
services), BGI Healthcare and BGI Agriculture (develops new breeds). They also
started a new environmental division for treating waste water. Here is more on
how the organization plans to cultivate young talent (emphasis ours) -
<!--more-->

>

But a pipeline of technologies would not be complete without a pipeline of
talent, said Dr. Wang.

We have spin-off companies, and we also have a college. Right now we have a
joint PHD program with University of Copenhagen and the Chinese University of
Hong Kong, he said.

And BGI has certainly capitalized on this youthful trend, hiring students
fresh out of college. **Dr. Wang told me that the average age for a scientist
at BGI is only 23, and in general the average age across the entire company is
just 26.**

Well this is a new territory, Dr. Wang said. There is no existing talent; they
all have to be trained. And the best way to train them is to recruit them from
the top universities and to throw them into real projects. The ones who have
more experience, you need more creative thinking from them, instead of just
training them what to do.

Overall, we fail to see what is wrong with that approach. However, most US
colleagues we spoke to remain skeptical about anything from China because of
their [socialist policies](http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/5ac969ec-a1c3-11e2-ad0c-
00144feabdc0.html#axzz2R6evFE6v), lack of personal freedom and constitutional
rights unlike what we enjoy here in USA.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/2LrbsUVSVl8" frameborder="0"> </iframe>
