---
title: A day to Think, to Pause, to Ponder - Jonathan Eisen
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
![photo](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2013/02/photo-
150x150.jpg)
<!--more-->

Two days back, [Jonathan Eisen wrote a remarkable
commentary](http://phylogenomics.blogspot.com/2013/02/a-day-to-think-to-pause-
to-ponder.html) that we recommend to all our readers.

>

Today is not an easy day for me.

I pause today to think about a person in my life.

This person was not Aaron Swartz, though I am thinking of him today too. The
person I refer to was my father. On this day, February 7, 1987, my father
Howard J. Eisen took his own life. I was a freshman in college then. Enjoying
life on my own at Harvard. Exploring the world of new friends, academic
pursuits, and the usual college antics. And then it all exploded. The details
are a bit of a blur and most are not really important for what I write about
here. But suffice it to say I was devastated.

Please read the rest [at Tree of Life
blog](http://phylogenomics.blogspot.com/2013/02/a-day-to-think-to-pause-to-
ponder.html). As you can guess from the above snippet, it is not for light
reading.

Both Jonathan and Mike Eisen are very creative scientists, and this place is
too small to go over all their scientific accomplishments. We already featured
[Jonathan Eisen's blog](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/07/27/how-to-stay-
current-in-bioinformaticsgenomics/) many times, but we also have very high
respect for Mike Eisen for reasons unrelated to science. It is because [when
we wrote an unfavorable commentary about
him](http://homolog.us/Social/making-a-case-for-retraction-of-2001-nature-
paper-on-human-genome/) and [posted the link in his
blog](http://www.michaeleisen.org/blog/?p=1190), he did not delete the link to
make himself look good. Everyone can handle praise, but those who can handle
criticism without losing temper are worthy of utter respect.

We hope this country continues to produce talented scientists and out-of-the-
box thinkers like the Eisen brothers.

\-------------

Edit. Mike Eisen wrote a separate commentary on [his father's
suicide](http://www.michaeleisen.org/blog/?p=1282) in his own blog that is
highly worth reading.

> I dont know what happened at this meeting, but somehow my father left
feeling that he was under suspicion something everyone involved knew he was
not. But whatever happened, it set something off.

Both of them chose to write on this personal topic because of Aaron Schwartz's
tragedy. We understand that it is very sensitive issue, but we do disagree
with Mike on one point.

> The second I read about what had happened with Aaron Swartz, the parallels
made me lurch. They both snapped under accusatory pressure.

Based on our understanding of what is going on in this country over the last
few years, Aaron Swartz was forced to commit suicide by the Federal
Government. Government prosecutors gave him other options, which were as bad
as committing suicide. The situation is far worse than their dad's case, which
itself was very tragic.

