---
title: How about a Chaotic Genome Assembler?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Earlier we discussed about conifer genome assembly in two commentaries.
<!--more-->

[Steven Salzberg at #bog13: Assembling 22Gb Conifer
Genome](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2013/05/11/steven-salzberg-at-bog13
-assembling-22gb-conifer-genome/)

[#bog13 Posters on Pine and
Coelacanth](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2013/05/13/bog13-posters-on-pine-and-
coelacanth/)

One important point overlooked in the commentary was that University of
Maryland (WMD) did most of the work on the whole-genome assembly with MaSuRCA,
and the acronym itself stands for **Maryland Super-Reads with Celera
Assembler**. The leaders of the UMD effort are Aleksey Zimin and Jim Yorke.

![](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8a/James_A_Yorke.jpg
/220px-James_A_Yorke.jpg)

Dr. Yorke is a distinguished mathematician with major contribution in chaos
theory. In 1975, he and his student Tien-Yien Li used the word 'choas' (as in
chaos theory) for the first time in a very interesting paper - "Period Three
Implies Chaos" (click on the image to read their paper).

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/05/Capture20-300x207.png)

For readers unfamiliar with [chaos
theory](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chaos_theory), it was one of the greatest
advances in mathematics in 20th century. It showed that perturbation method of
long-term forecast was invalid in many nonlinear systems, and 'complex'
behavior in nature could be derived from simple nonlinear equations. As an
example, try the following discrete equation -

![](http://upload.wikimedia.org/math/f/d/3/fd39f52fbf1b8938f2bf300a9ebd6a15.pn
g)

If you increase r above 3.56995, the series will start to behave erratically.
With a small change in r, you will see large divergence in the output over
time.

![](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/b2/Logistic_map_examples_s
mall.gif)

We know what you are thinking. How did the biodiversity paper published in
Nature (

[Severe Biodiversity Loss Expected by Year
2080](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2013/05/14/severe-biodiversity-loss-
expected-by-year-2080-due-to-climate-change/)) predict future in 2080 given
that even the simplest nonlinear system has chaotic uncertainty? Here is how.
Chaos theory was considered to be the greatest mathematical discovery of 20th
century, but it was extremely inconvenient for central planners, who wanted to
convey feeling of certainty, confidence and omniscience. A theory that claimed
to have changed long-term output dramatically with small change in input was
completely unacceptable. For that reason, chaos theory was 'disproved' by a
[very famous inventor](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Al_Gore) using a method
better than mathematics, namely politics. Central planners never had to look
back since then.

![](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8e/Al_Gore_at_Sapphi
reNow_2010_cropped.jpg/220px-Al_Gore_at_SapphireNow_2010_cropped.jpg)

In the meanwhile, those of you still stuck in the mathematical glories of past
century may enjoy our earlier commentary on complexity of sandpiles - [What
Does BTW Stand for?](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/09/12/what-does-btw-
stand-for/).

