---
title: Metagenomics of Buried Lake in Antarctica - Paper Differs from Earlier Press
  Release
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
**Correction: The PLOS One paper is from a different group than the one issuing press release.**
<!--more-->

![](http://4.bp.blogspot.com/_SqhhJb_P3Kk/TSnpt3hBTXI/AAAAAAAANPU/tS7o6L44uH8/
s640/Lake+Vostok.jpg)

We have been tracking this story since January, when we wrote -

[Expect Some Really Amazing Metagenome Data from
Russia](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/01/14/expect-some-really-
amazing-metagenome-data-from-russia/)

Their March press release got twitterosphere excited by claiming to find 'new
life form' -

[Is New Life Form Found Under Antarctic
Ice?](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/03/08/is-new-life-form-found-
under-antarctic-ice/)

A reader criticized us by private email for paying too much attention to the
press release and asked us to wait for the actual paper from the group. The
wise reader is of Russian origin and knows the system well, because the paper
published in PLOS One does not mention any new life.

[Subglacial Lake Vostok (Antarctica) Accretion Ice Contains a Diverse Set of
Sequences from Aquatic, Marine and Sediment-Inhabiting Bacteria and Eukarya](h
ttp://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0067221)

> Lake Vostok, the 7th largest (by volume) and 4th deepest lake on Earth, is
covered by more than 3,700 m of ice, making it the largest subglacial lake
known. The combination of cold, heat (from possible hydrothermal activity),
pressure (from the overriding glacier), limited nutrients and complete
darkness presents extreme challenges to life. Here, we report
metagenomic/metatranscriptomic sequence analyses from four accretion ice
sections from the Vostok 5G ice core. Two sections accreted in the vicinity of
an embayment on the southwestern end of the lake, and the other two
represented part of the southern main basin. We obtained 3,507 unique gene
sequences from concentrates of 500 ml of 0.22 m-filtered accretion ice
meltwater. Taxonomic classifications (to genus and/or species) were possible
for 1,623 of the sequences. Species determinations in combination with mRNA
gene sequence results allowed deduction of the metabolic pathways represented
in the accretion ice and, by extension, in the lake. Approximately 94% of the
sequences were from Bacteria and 6% were from Eukarya. Only two sequences were
from Archaea. In general, the taxa were similar to organisms previously
described from lakes, brackish water, marine environments, soil, glaciers,
ice, lake sediments, deep-sea sediments, deep-sea thermal vents, animals and
plants. Sequences from aerobic, anaerobic, psychrophilic, thermophilic,
halophilic, alkaliphilic, acidophilic, desiccation-resistant, autotrophic and
heterotrophic organisms were present, including a number from multicellular
eukaryotes.

Oh well !!

