---
title: China vs USA and Other Social Posts
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
We are doing our spring cleaning. All wiki-related links within the blog posts
are [set to the new wiki](http://homolog.us/wiki1/index.php?title=Main_Page).
We will start digging into codes again soon. Our own interests are in hardware
implementation of bioinformatics-related codes, but we also enjoy explaining
the algorithms in case it helps others.
<!--more-->

Few social commentaries are being moved to the social section, and we added
many others there. The following commentary is moved for example.

[Is a Society Stable with Too Much Sex, Too Little Love and no
Dignity?](http://homolog.us/Social/is-a-society-stable-with-too-much-sex-and-
too-little-love/)

The original point of the post was to show how Western (mainly Anglo-Saxon)
science changed from its defining period, the enlightenment. The picture is
more clear, when you extend the [google ngrams by going back another 100
years](http://homolog.us/Social/enlightenment/). We were hoping someone would
point that out, but given that nobody is interested in these topics, it is
better to move them away to social section. We added few other social
commentaries in the social sections. Some are directly relevant to science.
Some others are only linked peripherally.

[History of Plagiarism](http://homolog.us/Social/history-of-plagiarism/)

[Why There Will be Deflation and Bernanke is Powerless Against
It](http://homolog.us/Social/why-there-will-be-deflation-and-bernanke-is-
powerless/)

[The Book of Lord Shang (Legalism)](http://homolog.us/Social/the-book-of-lord-
shang-legalism/)

[Note: Legalism is the dominant social philosophy in USA]

[China vs USA](http://homolog.us/Social/china-vs-usa/)

Our views have not changed from what we always mentioned. China and Asia will
see severe deflationary depression and many overextended businesses will go
out of business. However, capitalism and center of science will move there in
the next cycle.

\-----------------

Sometimes it is difficult for us to draw the line between what goes into
social section and what in this section. Many of our commentaries regarding
ENCODE-hype and other problems in science are clearly understandable within
our 'secular decline in Anglo-Saxon science' narrative, but explaining those
takes us into the depth of social discussion. Similarly, any meaningful
comparison of China and USA takes us into -

[Adam Smith in Beijing: Lineages of the 21st Century](http://www.amazon.com
/Adam-Smith-Beijing-Lineages-Century/dp/1844672980)

or

[ReORIENT: Global Economy in the Asian Age](http://www.amazon.com/ReORIENT-
Global-Economy-Asian-Age/dp/0520214749)

Those books cover multi-century history of both regions, which we are very
familiar with. Unfortunately, many of those discussions are highly nuanced and
not twitterable one-liners with definitive answers. For the time being, we
will leave the commentaries directly related to sequencing, bioinformatics,
BGI, ENCODE, scientific practices and global warming here. Deeper philosophies
will reside in the social section. If anything does not fit, please remind us.

