---
title: Schrodinger's Lost Notebook from 1925
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
It is odd that everyone is interested in Schrodinger's cat, when they should
be looking for his notebooks :)
<!--more-->

Schrodinger was unusual among the theoretical physicists of his time, because
he bloomed very late at age 38. In contrast,

> four of the giants of quantum mechanics - Paul Dirac, Werner Heisenberg,
Wolfgang Pauli and Niels Bohr - all crafted their greatest theories as very
young men. (Dirac and Heisenberg, in fact, were accompanied by their mothers
to Stockholm to accept their Nobel Prizes.)

What or rather who was Schrodinger's secret? Nobody knows, because his 1925
notebook got lost. Here are more details [from an old NY Times
article](http://www.nytimes.com/1990/01/07/books/the-lone-ranger-of-quantum-
mechanics.html?pagewanted=all&src=pm):

> On the other hand, his objectivity allows him to study candidly, and
nonjudgmentally, two major obsessions of Schrodinger's life - the Eastern
philosophy of Vedanta and sex.

Mr. Moore informs us that Schrodinger kept a series of ''little black books''
in which he recorded the names of all his loves with a code to indicate ''the
denouement,'' as the author puts it, of each affair. He unbuttons
Schrodinger's code and reveals a life of stunning promiscuity. Schrodinger
admitted he detested his wife, Anny, sexually, and took on a series of
mistresses, three of whom bore him illegitimate daughters. Immediately after
his triumph in wave mechanics, he agreed to tutor 14-year-old twin girls named
Withi and Ithi Junger. Schrodinger called the latter ''Ithy-bitty'' and
regularly fondled her during their math lessons. He finally seduced her when
she was 17, assuring her she wouldn't get pregnant. She did, Schrodinger
immediately lost interest in her, and the girl underwent a disastrous abortion
that left her sterile. He then took on Hilde March, the wife of his assistant
Arthur March, as his mistress, and she bore him a daughter. March, ever the
dutiful assistant, agreed to be named the father, while his wife moved
eventually into the Schrodinger household to serve as Schrodinger's ''second
wife.'' Well, the great man's sordid affairs go on and on, and Mr. Moore
faithfully serves up all of the titillating details. He concludes that
Schrodinger needed ''tempestuous sexual adventures'' to inspire his great
discoveries. **Unfortunately, the notebook for the critical year 1925 has
disappeared, so the woman who erotically guided Schrodinger to his famous wave
equation, ''like the dark lady who inspired Shakespeare's sonnets,'' the
biographer tells us, ''may remain forever mysterious.''**

For a more gossipy version of origin of quantum mechanics, [check this
link](http://www.cracked.com/funny-3075-schrC3B6dinger/). We will note the
most hilarious part -

> This man didn't just have women, he had balls. On being invited to a
prestigious ceremony but specifically told he could bring only one date, Erwin
decided "hey, I'll just ask someone else to bring my mistress for me." A
brilliant scheme worthy of a mind like his. So who does he ask to fake date
his bit on the side? An undergraduate? A closet-case colleague? No. Not our
Schrodinger. He asked the Archbishop of Dublin. To bring his mistress to the
ceremony. The woman he was commiting adultery with. Smashing.

