---
title: Scientists Show that Global Warming is Destroying Antarctica
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/04/Capture6-300x225.png)
<!--more-->

We have one of the strongest evidence that global warming is wrecking havoc on
Antarctica, as reports Reuters.

[Scientists find Antarctic Ice is Melting Faster](http://news.yahoo.com
/scientists-antarctic-ice-melting-faster-064418343.html)

> CANBERRA (Reuters) - The summer ice melt in parts of Antarctica is at its
highest level in 1,000 years, Australian and British researchers reported on
Monday, adding new evidence of the impact of global warming on sensitive
Antarctic glaciers and ice shelves.

Researchers from the Australian National University and the British Antarctic
Survey found data taken from an ice core also shows the summer ice melt has
been 10 times more intense over the past 50 years compared with 600 years ago.

"It's definitely evidence that the climate and the environment is changing in
this part of Antarctica," lead researcher Nerilie Abram said.

Abram and her team drilled a 364-metre (400-yard) deep ice core on James Ross
Island, near the northern tip of the Antarctic Peninsula, to measure
historical temperatures and compare them with summer ice melt levels in the
area.

......

"Once your climate is at that level where it is starting to go above zero
degrees, the amount of melt that will happen is very sensitive to any further
increase in temperature you may have," Abram said.

Robert Mulvaney, from the British Antarctic Survey, said the stronger ice
melts are likely responsible for faster glacier ice loss and some of the
dramatic collapses from the Antarctic ice shelf over the past 50 years.

Their research was published in the Nature Geoscience journal.

Ladies and Gentlemen, you got belatedly April fooled by Reuters, because
Nature Geoscience itself provides a different summary.

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/04/Capture7-300x246.png)

[Complexity of recent Antarctic climate
change](http://www.natureasia.com/en/research/highlight/8426)

>

Nature Geoscience

April 15, 2013

West Antarctica and the Antarctic Peninsula have recently undergone dramatic
climate change, but not all of the changes are outside the range of natural
variability seen in the past two millennia, report two papers published online
this week in Nature Geoscience.

Nerilie Abram, Robert Mulvaney and colleagues assessed the historical context
for the increase in summer ice melt in the Antarctic Peninsula over the past
50 years, using an ice core that spanned the last 1,000 years. By looking for
layers that show signs of melting and refreezing, they find that the amount of
ice melt in recent decades has been unprecedented over the past 1,000 years.

In contrast, Eric Steig and colleagues looked at the isotopic signature of the
ice itself, using an array of ice cores from West Antarctica. Using model
simulations, they show that the isotopic composition of ice in recent decades
is related to variability in climate in the tropical Pacific Ocean. They find
that the isotopic composition of the ice over the past 50 years is unusual
when compared with the past 2,000 years. They note, however, that the Pacific
variability that drove these isotopic changes was not outside the range of
natural variability.

We are sure [some readers will describe
us](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2013/02/20/global-warming-and-other-
superstitions/) as white male republicans or white female ex-governor of
Alaska for pointing out this minor inconsistency.

\--------------------------------------

Hyperbole aside, let us take a look at the actual papers to see what is being
reported. First paper is from Nerilie J. Abram et al.

[Acceleration of snow melt in an Antarctic Peninsula ice core during the
twentieth
century](http://www.nature.com/ngeo/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/ngeo1787.html)

>

Over the past 50 years, warming of the Antarctic Peninsula has been
accompanied by accelerating glacier mass loss and the retreat and collapse of
ice shelves. A key driver of ice loss is summer melting; however, it is not
usually possible to specifically reconstruct the summer conditions that are
critical for determining ice melt in Antarctic. Here we reconstruct changes in
ice-melt intensity and mean temperature on the northern Antarctic Peninsula
since AD 1000 based on the identification of visible melt layers in the James
Ross Island ice core and local mean annual temperature estimates from the
deuterium content of the ice. During the past millennium, the coolest
conditions and lowest melt occurred from about AD 1410 to 1460, when mean
temperature was 1.6?C lower than that of 19812000. Since the late 1400s, there
has been a nearly tenfold increase in melt intensity from 0.5 to 4.9%. The
warming has occurred in progressive phases since about AD 1460, but
intensification of melt is nonlinear, and has largely occurred since the mid-
twentieth century. Summer melting is now at a level that is unprecedented over
the past 1,000 years. We conclude that ice on the Antarctic Peninsula is now
particularly susceptible to rapid increases in melting and loss in response to
relatively small increases in mean temperature.

Second paper is from Eric Steig et al.

[Recent climate and ice-sheet changes in West Antarctica compared with the
past 2,000
years](http://www.nature.com/ngeo/journal/vaop/ncurrent/abs/ngeo1778.html)

> Changes in atmospheric circulation over the past five decades have enhanced
the wind-driven inflow of warm ocean water onto the Antarctic continental
shelf, where it melts ice shelves from below1, 2, 3. Atmospheric circulation
changes have also caused rapid warming4 over the West Antarctic Ice Sheet, and
contributed to declining sea-ice cover in the adjacent AmundsenBellingshausen
seas5. It is unknown whether these changes are part of a longer-term trend.
Here, we use water-isotope (?18O) data from an array of ice-core records to
place recent West Antarctic climate changes in the context of the past two
millennia. We find that the ?18O of West Antarctic precipitation has increased
significantly in the past 50 years, in parallel with the trend in temperature,
and was probably more elevated during the 1990s than at any other time during
the past 200 years. However, ?18O anomalies comparable to those of recent
decades occur about 1% of the time over the past 2,000 years. General
circulation model simulations suggest that recent trends in ?18O and climate
in West Antarctica cannot be distinguished from decadal variability that
originates in the tropics. We conclude that the uncertain trajectory of
tropical climate variability represents a significant source of uncertainty in
projections of West Antarctic climate and ice-sheet change.

[This blog post](http://takvera.blogspot.com/2013/04/west-antarctic-ice-cores-
find-changes.html) nicely summarizes what Eric Steig is saying.

>

Lead author of the study Eric Steig from the University of Washington
identified that the majority of Antarctic warming came during the 1990s in
response to El Nio conditions in the tropical Pacific Ocean. The researchers
suggest the changes in the 1990s was similar to changes in other decades with
temperature spikes and identified the 1830s and 1940s.

"If we could look back at this region of Antarctica in the 1940s and 1830s, we
would find that the regional climate would look a lot like it does today, and
I think we also would find the glaciers retreating much as they are today,"
said Steig in a media release.

We will not mind if it is eventually found through scientific work that
Antarctic warming is indeed unprecedented rather than unusual. Neither will we
mind, if it is shown through proper research that human genome is 80%
functional. Our complaint is about sensational and misleading reporting of
science.

\-------------------------------

[Antarctica Cooling
Controversy](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antarctica_cooling_controversy)

The wikipedia article on Antarctica discusses why 'cooling controversy'
mentioned by Michael Crichton is not a controversy. We have not studied the
original papers to comment further.

