---
title: Ads in Disqus Commenting System
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
We felt jealous, when we found out few months back that the commenting system
of Titus Brown's blog looked prettier than ours. Not any more :) Disqus, the
popular commenting system, decided to abuse its user-base by placing confusing
ads, which look exactly like the original blog links.
<!--more-->

[Disqus Bait and Switch, Now With Ads](http://jacquesmattheij.com/disqus-bait-
and-switch-now-with-ads)

>

Looking at the site earlier today I suddenly noticed a couple of links to
sites that I would never ever think of endorsing through my blog.

A what is this link explained that this was disqus way to thank me for using
their comment system, a chunk of my webpage in between the comments section
and the article body was claimed in order to attend visitors to my website to
interesting content which they claim I recommend. I do no such thing.

Here is what it looked like:

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/02/Capture5-300x108.png)

The decision made [many users
unhappy](http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=5220072), but whether they will
switch their commenting systems or take abuse remains to be seen. When
Facebook did not seem trustworthy, we immediately closed our Facebook account.
That is why you do not see a Facebook link on the sidebar any more. It was lot
of pain to quit, because Facebook kept started showing picture after picture
of friends, and asked us whether we would really like to leave them. Geez !!

\----------------------------

One company we have been very distrustful of from day one is Google. Many
blogs and websites use Google Analytics (GA) to track their website
performance, but we always decided to stay away from Google. It is too easy to
select GA for a personal website, because Google makes whole lot of tools
freely available for anyone who uses GA. However, the idea of sending
information on who is reading our blog to an outside company that we do not
trust scared us enough to not choose that easy option. We use a self-installed
piwik analytics program and hopefully avoid any outside online monitoring.

Today we read few commentaries about Google in [our favorite alternate
blog](http://www.nakedcapitalism.com/2013/02/bradley-manning-1000-days-in-
jail-and-more-government-crackdown-on-transparency.html#comment-1102163),
which confirmed out suspicion (also check [Brennan's Saudi Drone Base:
Censorship, Assassinations, More
Terrorists](http://www.moonofalabama.org/2013/02/brennanss-drone-policies-
censorship-assassinations-more-terrorists.html)). Nakedcapitalism blog
suggested using [duckduckgo search
engine](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DuckDuckGo) instead of Google to avoid
being extensively monitored for all online activities. We have not tried Duck
Duck Go yet, but we avoid Google's free browser like plague.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/r7J18GS6ayc" frameborder="0"> </iframe>
