---
title: The Unraveling of 'We Do not Trust Chinese' Business Model
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
A few months back, we were chatting with the head of an American genomics
cloud company and casually asked how they expected to compete with BGI, given
the differential in cost structures. We thought he would mention superior
technology and we could go into a discussion on algorithms, hardware, etc. To
our surprise, he cited the lack of trust in Chinese government as his biggest
asset. Apparently, many US and Europe-based customers were afraid of sending
their data inside China, and his company could allay their fears by providing
a US-based data infrastructure.
<!--more-->

**Snowden Disclosures**

That conversation took place before the Snowden disclosures, which seemed to
have changed quite a few equations around the world. The disclosures are still
continuing in drip-drip-drip fashion and every time US mainstream
media/publicists/government appeared to discredit a claim, a new disclosure
showed that things were even more severe. Several things have become clear by
now.

(i) The spying has very little to do with terrorism or NSA would not go and
tap the phones of Angela Markel and alike. Flying planes into US buildings is
the last thing one expected from the heads of states of France, Germany and
Spain, although we would not be surprised if they changed mind after this
disclosures :)

(ii) The primary purpose of spying is likely to be economic espionage, or
stealing business-related information from foreign companies. In one of the
internal training documents, NSA gave a demo to young employees on how to go
into private network of Petrobas (Brazilian oil company) and steal
information.

(iii) The spooks cared very little about legality. Even though they had nearly
unlimited access from their fraudulent secret court, they turned that into
unlimited access by breaking into public clouds of Google and Yahoo.

![](http://www.zerohedge.com/sites/default/files/images/user5/imageroot/2013/1
0/NSA%20google%201.jpg)

(iv) Your personal medical data is not likely to be safe anywhere in the USA
and UK. That creates legal headaches for second-level companies, who are
possibly using the cloud services from Google, Microsoft or other big
companies to host data.

[DNAnexus Raises $15 Million, Teams With Google To Host Massive DNA
Database](http://techcrunch.com/2011/10/12/dnanexus-raises-15-million-teams-
with-google-to-host-massive-dna-database/)

If Google-executives are taking part in what appears to be illegal behavior
and if government takes part in same activities, how can a smaller company
sign a privacy and data protection contract with a customer in good
conscience, while storing data at Google?

A few detailed examples of what came out of NSA-related disclosures -

[How The NSA Spies On Your Google And Yahoo
Accounts](http://www.zerohedge.com/news/2013-10-30/how-nsa-spies-your-google-
and-yahoo-accounts)

> It's quite simple really, and as the WaPo explains, the NSA "has secretly
broken into the main communications links that connect Yahoo and Google data
centers around the world, according to documents obtained from former NSA
contractor Edward Snowden and interviews with knowledgeable officials. By
tapping those links, the agency has positioned itself to collect at will from
among hundreds of millions of user accounts, many of them belonging to
Americans. The NSA does not keep everything it collects, but it keeps a lot."

["NSA Tapped The Pope", Spied On Vatican To Prevent "Threats To Financial
System"](http://www.zerohedge.com/news/2013-10-30/nsa-tapped-pope-spied-
vatican-prevent-threats-financial-system)

[NSA hacked Mexican president's email, according to latest
leaks](http://www.theverge.com/2013/10/20/4858566/nsa-hacked-mexican-
presidential-email)

[Merkel: US spying has shattered allies' trust](http://news.yahoo.com/merkel-
us-spying-shattered-allies-trust-202157098.html)

Why not? Those are three most likely places to look for Osama and his fellow
travelers.

[NSA, Five Eyes use Australian embassies to gather intel on
Asia](http://rt.com/news/nsa-australian-embassies-asia-intelligence-998/)

> US intelligence agencies are using Australian embassies throughout Asia to
intercept data and gather information across the continent, according to the
latest report based on documents leaked by NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden.

Data collection facilities operate out of the embassies in Jakarta, Bangkok,
Hanoi, Bejing, and Dili, according to Fairfax media. There are also units in
the Australian High Commission in Kuala Lumpur, the most populated city in
Malaysia, and Port Moresby, the capital of Papua New Guinea.

More intelligence collection occurs at US embassies and consulates, as well as
at the diplomatic outposts of other Five Eye nations, particularly Britain and
Canada. The Defence Signals Directorate, which falls under the Australian
Defence Agency, conducts the surveillance missions, and most Australian
diplomatic officers are completely unaware of such activity, according to the
Sydney Morning Herald.

The Five Eyes is an alliance for intelligence cooperation that includes the
United States, Britain, Canada, Australia and New Zealand.

**Last Year's Stories about Chinese Hacking Were Likely Fake**

Two years back, Google raised a huge hue and cry about not being able to
protect privacy of its customers in China due to pressures from Chinese
government. Given how little the company cared about privacy based on
Snowden's disclosures, we may have to revisit many of the news stories on
Chinese hacking passed in mainstream media last year. You can sense that
change in tone in many of the recent comments at
[ycombinator](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=6641378), where the hackers
now realize that China was used as boogeyman to protect NSA and its main
backers.

[Gmail hack: phishing finger pointed at China's Lanxiang vocational
school](http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2011/jun/02/chinese-school-
implicated-cyber-attacks)

> Depending on your perspective, Lanxiang vocational school is either the
heart of a secretive global hacking conspiracy or a second-rate educational
factory that is best known for churning out hairdressers and cooks.

Founded in 1984, the school takes in 20,000 students a year and has a domestic
reputation for its kitchen and boutique training.

But it also has a large computer studies class. The school's catalogue boasts
10 huge, high-standard laboratories equipped with 2,000 Founder brand PCs. At
one point Lanxiang said it held a Guinness world record for the room with the
most computers.

The school gained notoriety in 2010 when the New York Times named it as one of
two schools suspected of involvement in hacking attacks on American companies
and human rights activists.

The report, which cited anonymous sources close to the investigation,
suggested the strikes were linked to a specific class taught at Lanxiang by a
Ukrainian professor. It traced the attacks to the IP address of one of the
school's computers.

**NSA Disclosures are Cutting into Bottom-line of US Companies**

Instead of making huge financial gains from the above economic espionage, US
companies seem to have shot themselves on the foot. Germany and Brazil are
talking about establishing private internet or US-free internet, but the
larger impact took place in Asia.

[Wolf Richter: NSA Revelations Kill IBM Hardware Sales In
China](http://www.nakedcapitalism.com/2013/10/wolf-richter-nsa-revelations-
kill-ibm-hardware-sales-in-china.html)

> The first shot was fired on Monday. Teradata, which sells analytics tools
for Big Data, warned that quarterly revenues plunged 21% in Asia and 19% in
the Middle East and Africa. Wednesday evening, it was IBMs turn to confess
that its hardware sales in China had simply collapsed. Every word was colored
by Edward Snowdens revelations about the NSAs hand-in-glove collaboration with
American tech companies, from startups to mastodons like IBM.

But the fiasco was tucked away under the lesser debacle of IBMs overall
revenues, which fell 4.1% from prior year, the sixth straight quarter of
declines in a row. Software revenue inched up 1%, service revenue skidded 3%.
At the hardware unit, Systems and Technology, revenue plunged 17%. Within
that, sales of UNIX and Linux Power System servers plummeted a dizzying 38%.
Governmental and corporate IT departments had just about stopped buying these
machines.

.........

All regions were crummy. Revenues in Europe/Middle East/Africa ticked up 1%.
In the Americas, they ticked down 1% The improvement came equally from the US
and Canada and once again, we had strong performance in Latin America, is how
CFO Mark Loughridge spun the situation during the earnings call because it was
less bad than last quarter.

But there was nothing to spin in Asia-Pacific, where revenues plunged 15%.
Revenues in IBMs growth markets dropped 9%. They include the BRIC countries
Brazil, Russia, India, and China where revenues sagged 15%. In China, which
accounts for 5% of IBMs total revenues, sales dropped 22%, with hardware
sales, nearly half of IBMs business there, falling off a cliff: down 40%.

[Germany Advises Journalists To Stop Using Google Over US Spying Concerns, May
Ask Snowden To Tesity Against NSA](http://www.zerohedge.com/news/2013-10-31
/germany-advises-journalists-stop-using-google-over-us-spying-concerns-may-
ask-snowde)

> "The German Federation of Journalists recommends journalists to avoid until
further notice the use of search engines and e-mail services from Google and
Yahoo for their research and digital communication," the union said in a
statement.

It cited "scandalous" reports of interception of both companies' web traffic
by the U.S. National Security Agency (NSA) and Britain's GCHQ.

"The searches made by journalists are just as confidential as the contact
details of their sources and the contents of their communication with them,"
said Michael Konken, head of the union which represents about 38,000
journalists. He said there were safe alternatives for both searches and email.

**Reaction among scientists and others**

In twitter, we follow two different communities - <del>scientists</del> PIs
(for definition, [check here](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/10/30
/technical-terms/)) and independent software developers. There is no overlap
between the communities, and the difference in reaction among those two
regarding Snowden-disclosures is quite eye-opening.

The reaction of the PI community is - "nothing to look here, move along".
Titus Brown's earlier snub toward our suggestion of not using Google analytics
captures that viewpoint well.

[Metagenome Biologist Titus Brown Offers New Course on Internet
Realities](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/06/10/titus-brown-offers-new-
class-on-internet-realities/)

Such reaction is understandable, because the government is the indirect
employer of all government-backed scientists.

Independent software programmers, on the other hand, are quite critical of NSA
spying. Not only they do not gain anything from economic espionage of other
companies' secrets, they stand to lose a lot, if international customers start
to shun US-based programmers. Many of those programmers work remotely on
projects from all around the world, and fragmented internet is the last thing
they like to see.

**The Good Guys**

[Lavabit And Silent Circle Join Forces To Make All Email Surveillance-
Proof](http://www.forbes.com/sites/kashmirhill/2013/10/30/lavabit-and-silent-
circle-join-forces-to-make-all-email-surveillance-proof/)

> In recent months, Lavabit, based in Texas, and Silent Circle, based in
Washington, D.C., both shuttered their encrypted email services. The companies
said they couldnt keep them running knowing they were vulnerable to
surveillance if faced with a dedicated enough attacker which for Lavabit came
in the form of the federal government when it wanted access to NSA
whistleblower Edward Snowdens Lavabit account. Now the companies are teaming
up with plans to offer an open-source tool that could make peer-to-peer, end-
to-end encryption an easy add-on for any email service. The challenging part:
they need to get other email providers especially the heavyweights, Google,
Yahoo, and Microsoft to join them in offering the tool.

The easy part: the name, which sounds like a group of superheroes or
supervillains depending on your perspective on monitoring and data-mining
email. Lavabit and Silent Circle are the first two members of the Dark Mail
Alliance, a group of email providers who will give users control over the
privacy of their email so that it cant be handed over to third parties,
scanned for ads, or easily hijacked by an interceptor. Were taking our
inspiration from the Rebel Alliance, says Levison. Were the rebels who have
decided privacy is too important to compromise on. Were fighting to bring
privacy back to the Internet.

**The Bad Guys**

The thugs at Google are using this opportunity to block sending all search-
engine keywords to downstream websites. For example, earlier our website used
to get information on how a viewer came to a particular blog post (google
search on 'de Bruijn graph' or 'transcriptome'), but Google stopped providing
that information two weeks back in the name of others' 'privacy'. However, if
you pay Google through one of its programs, you will be allowed to see those
keywords and privacy would not be a concern.

[Google to Encrypt ALL Keyword Searches: Say Goodbye to Keyword
Data](http://blog.hubspot.com/marketing/google-encrypting-all-searches-nj)

> Warning: This isn't one of those happy news updates that opens up new doors
for your marketing -- like Facebook announcing embedded posts. Nope -- this is
one that's going to actually close some doors for you. And like Peter Griffin
says, it's really going to grind your gears. Yesterday, Search Engine Land
reported that Google has made a change aimed at encrypting all search activity
-- except for clicks on ads.

[Google veteran brought in as part of health website
fix](http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2013/10/31/hhs-google-
healthcaregov-fix-effort/3327513/)

> WASHINGTON An engineer from technology giant Google has been recruited to
help fix HealthCare.gov, the new federal insurance exchange website.

Software companies Red Hat and Oracle will also assist, according to Julie
Bataille, spokeswoman for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services,
which has coordinated the development of the site that has experienced
numerous problems in its first month of operations.

Why not make the whole website open-source so that we can see what Google is
putting there. We can bet 'open-source advocates' like Titus Brown will never
make such suggestions.

Things are changing at quite fast pace, and it will not be clear, until the
passage of a few years, whether US businesses come out stronger than ever
through the above changes or whether they lose global dominance by trying to
take government-provided shortcut to success. Our vote is for the later.

