---
title: DORA Pledge - YASI from Government-funded Scientists
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Before continuing further,
<!--more-->

[DORA](http://am.ascb.org/dora/) = Declaration on Research Assessment

YASI = Yet Another Stupid Idea

Rage against impact factor has become the new fashion. [The following
note](http://www.ascb.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=1059
%3Ascientific-insurgents-say-journal-impact-factors-distort-
science&catid=121%3Anews-a-information&Itemid=402) has been making the rounds
on twitter and other places.

>

An ad hoc coalition of unlikely insurgentsscientists, journal editors and
publishers, scholarly societies, and research funders across many scientific
disciplinestoday posted an international declaration calling on the world
scientific community to eliminate the role of the journal impact factor (JIF)
in evaluating research for funding, hiring, promotion, or institutional
effectiveness.

The San Francisco Declaration on Research Assessment, or DORA, was framed by a
group of journal editors, publishers, and others convened by the American
Society for Cell Biology (ASCB) last December in San Francisco, during the
Societys Annual Meeting. The San Francisco group agreed that the JIF, which
ranks scholarly journals by the average number of citations their articles
attract in a set period, has become an obsession in world science. Impact
factors warp the way that research is conducted, reported, and funded. Over
five months of discussion, the San Francisco declaration group moved from an
insurrection, in the words of one publisher, against the use of the prominent
two-year JIF to a wider reconsideration of scientific assessment. The DORA
statement posted today makes 18 recommendations for change in the scientific
culture at all levelsindividual scientists, publishers, institutions, funding
agencies, and the bibliometric services themselvesto reduce the dominant role
of the JIF in evaluating research and researchers and instead to focus on the
content of primary research papers, regardless of publication venue. The DORA
coalition calls on all individuals and organizations engaged in scientific
research to [sign the San Francisco declaration](http://am.ascb.org/dora/).

The stupidity of these central planners knows no bound !! If signing a
declaration can solve any problem, we will start collecting signatures for
DONL (declaration on not lying) for politicians, DONBTG (declaration on not
bribing the government) for big companies and DOTI for all DORA signers. Yes,
DOTI stands for 'declaration for thinking intelligently', if you have not
figured it out.

Impact factor is only a symptom, but the real disease is large centrally-
funded science. Prior to government taking over science, scientists used to
argue about nature, truth, plagiarism (defined as stealing of ideas, not
paragraphs). There were only a few new 'fields' and even fewer scientists, but
most of them were solid scientists and not bull-shitters (BSers). Science
thankfully did not have enough money to feed too many BS-ers, and those were
the happy days.

After government took over and decided to pour billions of dollars, it had to
create simple measures to 'evaluate' productivity. Simplification and creating
rules is what the government does, because it has to give directions to create
uniform rules for processing large number of applications. At first, paper
count became the simple measure of choice. In the early to mid-90s, paper
count was in vogue. Those, who graduated in that period, gamed paper count
game heavily to get grants and positions. There were many 'you scratch my
back, I scratch your back' arrangements. Eventually, the central planners
decided to do something new and brought in 'citation count' and 'impact
factor'. Some people still have not adjusted to the new mode as you can see in
this 2009 paper titled [Estimates of global research productivity in
gynecologic oncology](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19509541) \-

> Research production and international cooperative teamwork in the 2 main
journals of gynecologic oncology increased within the 10 last years; 65.3% of
all published articles dealt either with epithelial ovarian cancer, cervical
cancer, or endometrial cancer. Endometrial cancer had the worst ratio number
of publications to estimated national incidence (United States, 2007). The
United States (41.15%) and Europe (29.72%) make up a striking 70.87% of the
world's research production in the field of gynecologic oncology. However, the
highest rate of increase shows in Turkey (22.5), the People's Republic of
China (6.87), and South Korea (5.83). Adjusted to the national GDP per capita
and population for the year 2006, research productivity seems best in Israel,
Austria, and Turkey.

Other planners want to be more cute and measure both 'quantity' and 'quality'.
Check "[Worldwide research productivity in critical care
medicine](http://ccforum.com/content/9/3/r258)" for example.

> **Introduction**

The number of publications and the impact factor of journals are accepted
estimates of the quantity and quality of research productivity. The objective
of the present study was to assess the worldwide scientific contribution in
the field of critical care medicine.

**Method**

All research studies published between 1995 and 2003 in medical journals that
were listed in the 2003 Science Citation Index (SCI) of Journal Citation
Reports under the subheading 'critical care' and also indexed in the PubMed
database were reviewed in order to identify their geographical origin.

**Results**

Of 22,976 critical care publications in 14 medical journals, 17,630 originated
from Western Europe and the USA (76.7%). A significant increase in the number
of publications originated from Western European countries during the last 5
years of the study period was noticed. Scientific publications in critical
care medicine increased significantly (25%) from 1995 to 2003, which was
accompanied by an increase in the impact factor of the corresponding journals
(47.4%). Canada and Japan had the better performance, based on the impact
factor of journals.

**Conclusion**

Significant scientific progress in critical care research took place during
the period of study (19952003). Leaders of research productivity (in terms of
absolute numbers) were Western Europe and the USA. Publications originating
from Western European countries increased significantly in quantity and
quality over the study period. Articles originating from Canada, Japan, and
the USA had the highest mean impact factor.. Canada was the leader in
productivity when adjustments for gross domestic product and population were
made.

If central planners measure how well they 'cured' cancer by counting the
number of papers or 'high impact' papers on cancer, then 'paper count' and
'impact factor' will be maximized. Therein lies the problem. Moreover, due to
simplistic nature of central planning, central planners will have to shift to
a new measure to evaluate efficiency of central planning in post-(impact
factor) era. So, DORA declaration, if adopted properly, will merely shift the
problem to something else.

Support of large projects and 'center grants' is another bad effect of central
planning. Central planners can only juggle with few balls in the air, and that
is why they want huge 'successful' projects like ENCODE in their portfolio.

**What is the solution then?**

In 1971, John Cowperthwaite became the governor of Hong Kong. He decided to
[stop collection of all kinds of government
statistics](http://www.quebecoislibre.org/06/061029-5.htm). People of Hong
Kong never lived better !!

> Asked what is the key thing poor countries should do, Cowperthwaite once
remarked: "They should abolish the Office of National Statistics." In Hong
Kong, he refused to collect all but the most superficial statistics, believing
that statistics were dangerous: they would led the state to fiddle about
remedying perceived ills, simultaneously hindering the ability of the market
economy to work. This caused consternation in Whitehall: a delegation of civil
servants were sent to Hong Kong to find out why employment statistics were not
being collected; Cowperthwaite literally sent them home on the next plane
back.

We believe impact factor and other anomalies will go away, if scientists shun
central planning agencies (NSF, NIH, etc.) creating measures for their
effectiveness. The next step should be complete dismantling or
decentralization of those central planning agencies. We do not see small
software companies worried about 'impact factor' of their libraries before
releasing new code. Why scientists?

