---
title: Digging into BWA-mem Code
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
![write-blog](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/write-
blog8-300x225.png)
<!--more-->

As you can tell, we are in very early stage of figuring out what is going on.

Algorithm-wise, Lam's group integrated BWT and Smith Waterman. That was a
major breakthrough, and it made Smith Waterman competitive with BLAST. (It was
described in the first paper of previous commentary.)

\------------------

Second improvement came from their incorporation of bidirectional BWT. (Please
check second paper of previous commentary).

BWA incorporates something called FMD-index described in the Fermi paper
(third one in prev. commentary) as

> In comparison to the bidirectional BWT, which uses two FM-indices, the FMD-
index builds both forward and reverse strand DNA sequences in one index.
Although the FMD-index is not applicable to generic texts, it is conceptually
more consistent with double-strand DNA and improves the speed of exact
matching as we only need to search against one index. For example, DWA-SW gets
a 80% speedup when we adopt the FMD-index as the data structure.

\-------------------

Third conceptually important step is 'supermaximal exact matches' as described
in Fermi paper.

> An FMD-index can be used to find supermaximal exact matches (SMEMs) between
a reference and a query sequence. Formally, a maximal exact match (MEM) is an
exact match that cannot be extended in either direction of the match. An SMEM
is a MEM that is not considered in other MEMs on the query sequence. Fermi
uses SMEMs to map reads back to the unitig.

\--------------------

Fourth important step is seeding and reseeding strategy of BMA-MEM, described
in the fourth paper of the list.

\---------------------

We believe it is important to fully understand the four conceptual steps
mentioned above before BWA-MEM code starts to talk to you.

Remaining BWA-MEM files are here -

![write-blog](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/write-
blog9-300x225.png)

\------------

1.[ klib - Attractive Chaos](https://github.com/attractivechaos/klib)

> Klib is a standalone and lightweight C library distributed under MIT/X11
license. Most components are independent of external libraries, except the
standard C library, and independent of each other. To use a component of this
library, you only need to copy a couple of files to your source code tree
without worrying about library dependencies.

Klib strives for efficiency and a small memory footprint. Some components,
such as khash.h, kbtree.h, ksort.h and kvec.h, are among the most efficient
implementations of similar algorithms or data structures in all programming
languages, in terms of both speed and memory use.

2\. [Qsufsort](http://www.bradblock.com.s3-website-us-
west-1.amazonaws.com/Faster_Suffix_Sorting.pdf)

> FASTER SUFFIX SORTING - N. JESPER LARSSON AND KUNIHIKO SADAKANE

Abstract. We propose a fast and memory ecient algorithm for lexico-

graphically sorting the suxes of a string, a problem that has important

applications in data compression as well as string matching.

Our algorithm eliminates much of the overhead of previous specialized

approaches while maintaining their robustness for all kinds of input. For

input size n, our algorithm operates in only two integer arrays of size n,

and has worst case time complexity O(nlogn).

We demonstrate experimentally that our algorithm has favourable

performance compared to other approaches, and argue that our algo-

rithm is the prime choice for general sux sorting.

