---
title: Why Do Respected University Professors Teach on Coursera?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
[Coursera](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coursera) is an internet-based company
that works with universities to provide free courses on various topics. Many
offered courses are taught by well-respected university professors.
<!--more-->

Quite a bit of speculation has been going on regarding the business model of
Coursera. Here is the wiki summary -

>

The contract between Coursera and participating universities contains a
"brainstorming" list of ways to generate revenue, including certification
fees, introducing students to potential employers and recruiters (with student
consent), tutoring, sponsorships and tuition fees. As of March 2012, Coursera
was not yet generating revenue. That July, certification and the sale of
information to potential employers was being explored. Thus far the company
has been funded by $16 million in venture capital awarded in April 2012. John
Doerr suggested that people will pay for "valuable, premium services". Any
revenue stream will be divided, with schools receiving a small percentage of
revenue and 20% of gross profits.

[Here](https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/400864-coursera-fully-executed-
agreement.html#document/p40) is the fully executed agreement document of
Coursera with Universities discussing potential monetization strategies. Let
us summarize.

1\. Coursera will provide certificates for those taking classes with it. We
presume the certificates will come for a fee.

2\. Coursera will charge fee for testing a person.

3\. Coursera will allow employers to assess potential employees by going
through electronic data.

4\. Coursera will get paid for human tutoring service.

5\. Corporate employee training for a higher fee.

6\. Website ads.

7\. "For certain courses, tuition fee will be charged (after an initial free
period)".

Here are four other links discussing Coursera's business model.

[Coursera debates future of monetization](http://www.thedp.com/article/2013/04
/coursera-debates-future-of-monetization)

[Whats the Business Model of MOOCs Such As
Coursera?](http://socialwebqanda.com/2013/03/whats-the-business-model-of-
moocs-such-as-coursera/)

[With verified certificates, Coursera offers model for making money from web
classes](http://gigaom.com/2013/01/08/with-verified-certificates-coursera-
offers-model-for-making-money-from-web-classes/)

[Curbing The Cost Of College: Coursera Wins Approval To Offer Online Courses
For Credit For Under $200](http://techcrunch.com/2013/02/07/curbing-the-cost-
of-college-coursera-wins-approval-to-offer-online-courses-for-credit-for-
under-200/)

**How much money is being invested?**

[NY Times tells us](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/01/07/education/massive-open-
online-courses-prove-popular-if-not-lucrative-yet.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0)
that -

>

In less than a year, Coursera has attracted $22 million in venture capital and
has created so much buzz that some universities sound a bit defensive about
not leaping onto the bandwagon.

Other approaches to online courses are emerging as well. Universities
nationwide are increasing their online offerings, hoping to attract students
around the world. New ventures like Udemy help individual professors put their
courses online. Harvard and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology have
each provided $30 million to create edX. Another Stanford spinoff, Udacity,
has attracted more than a million students to its menu of massive open online
courses, or MOOCs, along with $15 million in financing.

We are actually not that concerned about Coursera's business model. Maybe the
company will be successful, or maybe the shrewd VCs will successfully dump it
on some hapless pension fund.

Our question is why university professors are helping this business to
succeed. What is in it for them and how is it legally allowed.

**Legality**

A set of organizations were granted non-profit status in USA, because they
provided useful 'charitable' services. [501(c)(3)
clause](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/501\(c\)_organization) covers -

>

Religious, Educational, Charitable, Scientific, Literary, Testing for Public
Safety, to Foster National or International Amateur Sports Competition, or
Prevention of Cruelty to Children or Animals Organizations.

Given that education is the core mission of Universities, how can they
'outsource' it to a private business and still maintain non-profit purpose.
Please shine some light on it, because we have no training in law.

**Competition**

If you ignore the above aspect of legality and treat the Universities as tax-
free businesses, why are their professors collaborating with the company to
make it successful? It seems like Coursera's business model will decimate
traditional 'business model' of universities. What do well-respected
professors gain by giving their intellectual contributions away to Coursera?

For example, if Coursera charges $100 to give someone a 'Genomics 302'
certificate from Lander, why will that someone pay $3000 to take genomics
course from University of Northern Anchorage? I see the relative advantage of
Eric Lander over University of Northern Anchorage up to that point, but if we
extend the line of thinking, is not Coursera destroying the business model of
[University of
Elihu](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elihu_Yale#Tenure_as_President_of_Madras)
as well?

Please note that we are not suggesting that Coursera is doing something
unethical or the company should not exist. With ease of electronic
communication, it is inevitable that distant learning will provide value to
some people. We are wondering what the University professors gain through the
exchange.

\-------------------------------

Edit. We first rejected the following link thinking that it was from the
Onion. These days reality is more hilarious than the funny-sites.

[Free Online Education Is Now Illegal in Minnesota](http://www.slate.com/blogs
/future_tense/2012/10/18/minnesota_bans_coursera_state_takes_bold_stand_agains
t_free_education.html)

