---
title: "(As We Predicted Six Months Back), BGI Plans IPO"
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
We wrote in February -
<!--more-->

[BGI It is the Wild West of
Genomics](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/02/07/bgi-it-is-the-wild-west-
of-genomics/)

> Business Week provides Beginners guide to the genome sequencing factory in a
nice article -

Its the Wild West, says George Church, a professor of genetics at Harvard
University and an adviser to BGI. This is a field that has arisen overnight,
and the number of discoveries is going up exponentially. A single genome
contains a massive amount of data (a human genome, for example, contains about
3 billion nucleotides, or data points), and a bioinformatics experts work
requires sifting through, comparing, and testing the information in multiple
genomes. While sequencing costs have dropped dramatically in the last 10
years, the process is far from automated. Companies that offer personalized
genetic testing, such as 23andMe, typically test only for a sampling of 100
traits and diseases, or about 1/3,000th of the entire genome, Church says. For
about $4,000, BGI does the whole thing.

**What next? Are they going IPO Silicon valley style? We hope not !!**

It took six long months for that forecast to come true.

[ChinaBio Today reports](http://www.chinabiotoday.com/articles/20130903):

> **BGI Shenzhen Plans IPO**

publication date: Sep 3, 2013

BGI Shenzhen, the worlds largest sequencing company, is planning to split
itself in two and IPO its institutional sequencing business. The other half,
its retail diagnostic sequencing segment, which serves the hospital/clinic
market, will remain private. BGI hasnt officially announced its IPO, so no
financial details for the transaction are available, nor has the company named
its target exchange.

That was easy to see. A Business Week article costs enormous amount of money
and provides little benefit to a business, unless there is a need to be known
to public. Only reason we can think of for a highly specialized company to be
popular is an IPO.

