---
title: True Cost of Publishing in Various Journals
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
We did not intend to run this week as our open-access week. Yesterday we were
looking for some sources to find a realistic estimate of cost of publishing
papers by various journals and found [a different commentary published in
Nature in 2003](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/07/15/open-access-can-
humans-survive-on-planet-earth/). Today we were not really looking for
anything and came across this fantastic article providing break-down by
company. (h/t: @dgmacarthur)
<!--more-->

[Open access: The true cost of science publishing](http://www.nature.com/news
/open-access-the-true-cost-of-science-publishing-1.12676)

> Data from the consulting firm Outsell in Burlingame, California, suggest
that the science-publishing industry generated $9.4 billion in revenue in 2011
and published around 1.8 million English-language articles an average revenue
per article of roughly $5,000. Analysts estimate profit margins at 2030% for
the industry, so the average cost to the publisher of producing an article is
likely to be around $3,5004,000.

Most open-access publishers charge fees that are much lower than the
industry's average revenue, although there is a wide scatter between journals.
The largest open-access publishers BioMed Central and PLoS charge $1,3502,250
to publish peer-reviewed articles in many of their journals, although their
most selective offerings charge $2,7002,900. In a survey published last year2,
economist Bo-Christer Bjrk of the Hanken School of Economics in Helsinki and
psychologist David Solomon of Michigan State University in East Lansing looked
at 100,697 articles published in 1,370 fee-charging open-access journals
active in 2010 (about 40% of the fully open-access articles in that year), and
found that charges ranged from $8 to $3,900. Higher charges tend to be found
in 'hybrid' journals, in which publishers offer to make individual articles
free in a publication that is otherwise paywalled (see 'Price of prestige').
Outsell estimates that the average per-article charge for open-access
publishers in 2011 was $660.

Here is the incredible part (emphasis ours) -

> The few numbers that are available show that costs vary widely in this
sector, too. For example, Diane Sullenberger, executive editor for Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences in Washington DC, says that the journal
would need to charge about $3,700 per paper to cover costs if it went open-
access. But **Philip Campbell, editor-in-chief of Nature, estimates his
journal's internal costs at 20,00030,000 ($30,00040,000) per paper. **

