---
title: Richard Durbin at International Maths Olympiad
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
![](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/84/Richard_Durbin
%2C_Wellcome-Sanger%2C_Cambridge%2C_UK.JPG_%282698443141%29.jpg/250px-
Richard_Durbin%2C_Wellcome-Sanger%2C_Cambridge%2C_UK.JPG_%282698443141%29.jpg)
<!--more-->

While going through a number of papers (SGA, Fermi, BWA), a Google search took
us to

[Richard M. Durbin's wiki
page](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_M._Durbin). We got curious after
seeing the Math's Olympiad reference there and checked the [1978 IMO
page](http://www.imo-official.org/year_individual_r.aspx?year=1978&column=tota
l&order=desc&nameform=western&gender=hide). Indeed [Durbin was
there](http://www.imo-official.org/participant_r.aspx?id=11087) with a silver
and a bronze medal.

For those with spare time in hand, here is a problem from the 1978 Olympiad -

> An international society has its members from six different countries. The
list of members contains 1978 names, numbered 1; 2; :::; 1978: Prove that
there is at least one member whose number is the sum of the numbers of two
members from his own country, or twice as large as the number of one member
from his own country.

Every year, the Maths Olympiad committee works very hard to find one good
problem that has the number of the IMO year in it.

>

1979/1. Let p and q be natural numbers such that

p/q= 1 -1/2 + 1/3-1/4+............-1/1318+1/1319

Prove that p is divisible by 1979.

In our year, that turned out to be an embarrassment for the mathematician who
selected the problem, because he picked it from his own papers and thought the
problem would be very difficult. Instead, every kid (except me uneducated in
numbers theory) solved it through very straightforward application of Chinese
Remainder theorem, and was puzzled why the problem was in IMO.

\-----------------------------------

What happened to those at the top of the pack at IMO in Durbin's year? We
googled the top guy ([Mark Kleiman](http://www.imo-
official.org/participant_r.aspx?id=33)) and could not find him anywhere. That
was rather odd ! The second guy ([Richard Ewen Borcherds](http://www.imo-
official.org/participant_r.aspx?id=23)) [received a Field
medal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Borcherds). A number of others
became professors of computer science.

![Richard Borcherds](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8e
/Richard_Borcherds.jpg/220px-Richard_Borcherds.jpg)

\--------------------------------------

We follow the Maths Olympiad trends very diligently, and [Ron Unz's
observation about 'US
Meritocracy'](http://www.theamericanconservative.com/articles/the-myth-of-
american-meritocracy/) did not surprise us.

> This evidence of a massively disproportionate Asian presence among top-
performing students only increases if we examine the winners of national
academic competitions, especially those in mathematics and science, where
judging is the most objective. Each year, America picks its five strongest
students to represent our country in the International Math Olympiad, and
during the three decades since 1980, some 34 percent of these team members
have been Asian-American, with the corresponding figure for the International
Computing Olympiad being 27 percent. The Intel Science Talent Search, begun in
1942 under the auspices of the Westinghouse Corporation, is Americas most
prestigious high school science competition, and since 1980 some 32 percent of
the 1320 finalists have been of Asian ancestry (see Appendix F).

Given that Asians accounted for just 1.5 percent of the population in 1980 and
often lived in relatively impoverished immigrant families, the longer-term
historical trends are even more striking. Asians were less than 10 percent of
U.S. Math Olympiad winners during the 1980s, but rose to a striking 58 percent
of the total during the last thirteen years 20002012. For the Computing
Olympiad, Asian winners averaged about 20 percent of the total during most of
the 1990s and 2000s, but grew to 50 percent during 20092010 and a remarkable
75 percent during 20112012.

[Rest of his article](http://www.theamericanconservative.com/articles/the-
myth-of-american-meritocracy/) is well worth reading.

\----------------------------------------

Speaking of Durbin, we were very impressed interacting with a number of his
students (Heng Li, Jared Simpson).

