---
title: Today's Highlights - "The Other Side of Academic Freedom"
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
A. [The other side of "academic freedom"](http://matt-
welsh.blogspot.com/2013/04/the-other-side-of-academic-freedom.html ) h/t:
@genetics_blog
<!--more-->

When we wrote "[When to Leave the Academia (University
Cartel)?](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/12/03/when-to-leave-the-academia-
university-cartel/)", we learned that commentaries on leaving academia gets
far more attention that commentaries about science, genome assembly and, God
forbid, complex bioinformatics algorithms.

In the linked commentary, Harvard CS professor Matt Welsh told readers, why he
left academia to join Google. Even though he got tenure and was 'free to do
anything', he explained that he was not really 'free', because his innovative,
non-mainstream ideas did not get funding. That had been a less acknowledged
aspect of academia that is being mentioned more often these days with funding
cuts for small projects. Interestingly, it gets reinforced by cowardly
behavior of those at relatively high positions, [such as Sean
Eddy](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2013/04/09/homolog-us-blog-calls-for-sean-
eddy-be-fired-for-the-sake-of-good-science/). When he gives tacit support for
'big science' projects, such as ENCODE and human brain mapping, it results in
more funding being sucked away from small, innovative ideas and more Matt
Welshes leaving for ad companies.

Suggestion from Titus Brown based on Matt Welsh's commentary -

[Some advice to young graduate students](http://ivory.idyll.org/blog/advice-
to-graduate-students.html)

>

If you are a gradate student, and whether or not you are definitely planning
to go into academia, or toying with going into biotech or a startup, or
completely uncertain, write a professional blog.

B. [Good Seqanswers Discussion on Aligning Ion Torrent
Data](http://seqanswers.com/forums/showthread.php?t=29595) h/t: lex

MrGuy:

> TMAP works very well. Bowtie pretty bad. CLC (commercial) worked just as
good as TMAP. Mosaic worked fine, too. I generally find if you follow the
manufacturers recommendations things seem to work pretty well. Our strategy is
looking to be TMAP for on "torrent" server analysis and CLC for off server
custom analysis. I haven't really tested anything more since everything is
working just fine and compares well with previous work we've done.

C. [Deanna Church on the Reference Genome Past, Present and Future](http://www
.bio-itworld.com/2013/4/22/church-on-reference-genomes-past-present-
future.html)

D. [An Introduction to Social Media for Scientists](http://www.plosbiology.org
/article/info:doi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001535) h/t: @genetics_blog

E. In biggest business news, Roche quit collaborating with IBM on nanopore
sequencing.

Here are a set of press releases from 2010-2013:

2010:

[Roche and IBM Collaborate to Develop Nanopore-Based DNA Sequencing
Technology](http://www-03.ibm.com/press/us/en/pressrelease/32037.wss)

> YORKTOWN HEIGHTS, N.Y. & BRANFORD, Conn. - 01 Jul 2010: Roche (SIX: RO, ROG;
OTCQX: RHHBY) and IBM (NYSE: IBM) announced today an agreement to develop a
nanopore-based technology that will directly read and sequence human DNA
quickly and efficiently. Focused on advancing IBM's recently published "DNA
Transistor" technology, the collaboration will take advantage of IBM's
leadership in microelectronics, information technology and computational
biology and Roche's expertise in medical diagnostics and genome sequencing.

The novel technology, developed by IBM Research, offers true single molecule
sequencing by decoding molecules of DNA as they are threaded through a
nanometer-sized pore in a silicon chip. The approach holds the promise of
significant advantages in cost, throughput, scalability, and speed compared to
sequencing technologies currently available or in development.

**2011:**

[Roche Acquires License to Nanopore Technology with Sights on $1,000 Whole
Genome Sequencing](http://www.genengnews.com/gen-news-highlights/roche-
acquires-license-to-nanopore-technology-with-sights-on-1-000-whole-genome-
sequencing/81245804/)

> Roche negotiated a license to nanopore-based DNA base sensing and reading
technologies from the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University and the
Columbia University Nanoscience Center. The firm claims that these new
technologies could help take the cost of sequencing a whole human genome down
to well under $1,000.

The technologies will be used by Roches sequencing center and collaborators
454 Life Sciences and IBM to develop and commercialize a single-molecule
nanopore DNA sequencer. The deal was brokered by Arizona State Universitys
technology transfer arm, Arizona Technology Enterprises, and includes
sponsored research funding to help the academic researchers progress
development of the technology toward commercialization.

**2012:**

[Nanopore Genome Sequencer Makes its Debut- Technique Promises it will Produce
a human genome in 15 Minutes](http://www.nature.com/news/nanopore-genome-
sequencer-makes-its-debut-1.10051)

> Technology that its parent company says will sequence a human genome in just
15 minutes opened its first data run to scrutiny today.

Oxford Nanopore Technologies, based in Oxford, UK, revealed the initial
results from its GridION system at the Advances in Genome Biology and
Technology meeting in Marco Island, Florida. The firm expects to start selling
its new machine in the second half of this year and also plans to launch the
worlds first miniaturized, disposable sequencer the MinION which will retail
for less than US$900.

**Did you notice that the price went down from $1000 to $900?**

**2013:**

[Roche Dissolves Applied Science Unit as It Ends IBM
Alliance](http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-04-23/roche-dissolves-applied-
science-unit-as-it-ends-ibm-alliance.html)

> Roche Holding AG (ROG) will dissolve its Applied Science unit as it sees
further price pressure and funding cuts in life-science research and said its
ended an alliance with International Business Machines Corp. (IBM)

**Even $900-$1000 is too high a price for vaporware !!!**

[DNA Electronics confirms continued development of its DNA sequencing
solutions using semiconductor technology](http://dnae.co.uk/wp-
content/uploads/2013/04/2013-04-23-DNAe-Roche-statement.pdf)

>

Regius Professor Chris Toumazou, CEO and founder of DNA Electronics, a
thought-leader in the semiconductor technology, commented I would like to
thank Roche for our fruitful collaboration and for handing us back the
project. Harnessing additional unlicensed IP, and without any limitations on
field of use, DNAe will now continue the development of the platform but with
a new focus to create a disruptive total solution.

[Four Lessons From IBM And Roche's Failed DNA
Collaboration](http://www.forbes.com/sites/matthewherper/2013/04/23/four-
lessons-from-ibm-and-roches-failed-dna-collaboration/)

> This is a lesson weve learned over and over again. Its even true for
startups that take a Silicon-Valley approach. Take Pacific Biosciences of
California, another DNA sequencer maker. The company announced vaporware,
raised huge amounts of venture capital, and made an pedal-on-the-gas push to
try to take over the DNA sequencing market. Its machine came up short, and the
failure to find a niche has left it looking for a purposes.

**We do not think our readers from PacBio will be too happy to read the above text! PacBio instrument is not vaporware. **

