---
title: Happiness, Anger, Selfishness, Monogamy - All Explained by Science Today
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
While good papers by real scientists like Heng Li are getting rejected and [a
reviewer goes to the extent of calling him 'scientifically
dishonest'](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/students/2013/05/29/mapping-god-
scientifically-dishonest/), top journals have no problem getting themselves
filled with garbage from social 'sciences'. We already presented -
<!--more-->

[Tragedy of the Day: PNAS Got Duped by Positivity Lady
!!](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/08/05/tragedy-of-the-day-pnas-got-
duped-by-positivity-lady/)

![](http://chronicle.com/blogs/percolator/files/2013/08/fredrickson_barbara_11
web2-2-200x300.jpg)

A reader brought to our attention another 2013 paper by the positivity lady,
this time published in Physiological Science. The abstract alone made us puke.

[How Positive Emotions Build Physical Health Perceived Positive Social
Connections Account for the Upward Spiral Between Positive Emotions and Vagal
Tone](http://pss.sagepub.com/content/24/7/1123.abstract)

In the meanwhile, the math in her 2005 paper on nonlinear dynamics was
challenged by Alan Sokal, and she claimed that she did not understand her
equations. That is an outrageous statement given that the lady was credited
for providing mathematical basis for psychology. The commentary [The Magic
Ratio That Wasnt](http://chronicle.com/blogs/percolator/the-magic-ratio-that-
wasnt/33279) is well written on that saga.

She is not alone. Science journal published a ['Research
Article'](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/early/2013/07/31/science.1235367),
where the authors claimed to link the increase in the rate of violence around
the world with climate change. From Ron Weiss' blog -

> The Darwin made me do it, or did he?

First, it seems that climate change engenders violence (BBC story about a
Science article).

> Shifts in climate are strongly linked to increases in violence around the
world, a study suggests.

US scientists found that even small changes in temperature or rainfall
correlated with a rise in assaults, rapes and murders, as well as group
conflicts and war.

The team says with the current projected levels of climate change, the world
is likely to become a more violent place.

How this jibes with the On High pronouncement by the Authority from Harvard
(Steven Pinker) in his book, "The Better Angels of Our Nature", that suddenly
our nature (our gentler angels, that is our inherentic genetic nature somehow
made prisoner by our environment until recently) has come to be in control and
we're not violent any more--stories the media seem to have blessed as The
Truth, we don't know! After all, haven't we been told, with great authority,
that natural selection and competition have made us the nasty violent beasts
that would please any strongly adaptationist Darwinian?

[Ron Weiss included](http://ecodevoevo.blogspot.com/2013/08/the-methane-made-
me-do-it-but-ill-be.html?m=1) three other 'science' papers published in Nature
Communications and other top journals explaining monogamy and telling us how
nature does not like selfishness !! In his summary -

> The problem, of course, is that the bullshit factor (that's a technical term
we scientists use, for which there isn't a good vernacular equivalent) is now
part of science. It's science's playing on the stage of attention-seeking, and
the media (presumably trained somewhere, but apparently not trained to do
their job properly and be skeptical) dance along. Well, it's how science is
done these days. Unfortunately, we let the scientists tell Hollywood stories--
melodramatic, scary, heavy, and so on--but we don't require Hollywood to pay
for the 'research' on which they're based.

But there is hope and that is ['bad science'](http://www.badscience.net/), a
website and blog dedicated to bad science. It is maintained by Ben Goldacre
(thanks bonay maronay), whose book was [covered in an earlier
commentary](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/students/2012/09/23/the-drugs-dont-
work-and-open-source-will-not-make-them-work/). We hope Ben Goldacre starts a
journal titled 'bad science', where real researchers like Heng and others can
publish their rejected quality work. That will fit well our upside-down world
of scientific publication.

