---
title: Exo-Klenow Fragment for A-tailing and T-tailing
categories:
- chem
---
[Klenow fragment](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Klenow_fragment)
<!--more-->

> The Klenow fragment is a large protein fragment produced when DNA polymerase
I from E. coli is enzymatically cleaved by the protease subtilisin. First
reported in 1970,[1] it retains the 5'-3' polymerase activity and the 3 ? 5
exonuclease activity for removal of precoding nucleotides and proofreading,
but loses its 5' ? 3' exonuclease activity.

The other smaller fragment formed when DNA polymerase I from E. coli is
cleaved by subtilisin retains the 5'-3' exonuclease activity but does not have
the other two activities exhibited by the Klenow fragment (i.e. 5'-> 3'
polymerase activity, and 3'->5' exonuclease activity).

**exo-Klenow fragment**

> Just as the 5' ? 3' exonuclease activity of DNA polymerase I from E.coli can
be undesirable, the 3' ? 5' exonuclease activity of Klenow fragment can also
be undesirable for certain applications. This problem can be overcome by
introducing mutations in the gene that encodes Klenow. This results in forms
of the enzyme being expressed that retain 5' ? 3' polymerase activity, but
lack any exonuclease activity (5' ? 3' or 3' ? 5'). This form of the enzyme is
called the exo- Klenow fragment.

The exo-Klenow fragment is used in some fluorescent labeling reactions for
microarray.

Use -

Detection of ultra-rare mutations by next-generation sequencing (PNAS 2012) to
help A-tailing and T-tailing. Quoting from their supplementary text -

> **Adapter Synthesis.** Duplex Tag-labeled adapters were synthesized from two
oligonucleotides (PAGE purified; Integrated DNA Technologies), designated as
the primer strand: AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACACTCTTTCCCTACACGACGCTCTTCCGATCT
and the template strand:
/5phos/ACTGNNNNNNNNNNNNAGATCGGAAGAGCACACGTCTGAACTCCAGTCAC. The two adapter
strands were annealed by combining equimolar amounts of each oligo to a final
concentration of 50 ?M and heating to 95 C for 5 min. The oligo mix was
allowed to cool to room temperature over 1 h. The annealed primer-template
complex was extended in a reaction consisting of 40 ?M primer template, 25
units Klenow exo? DNA polymerase (New England Biolabs), 250 ?M each dNTP, 50
mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.9, 10 mM MgCl2, and 1 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 C. The
product was purified by ethanol precipitation. Due to the partial A-tailing
property of Klenow exo-, this protocol results in a mixture of blunt-ended
adapters and adapters with a single-nucleotide A overhang. A single-nucleotide
A overhang was added to residual blunt fragments by incubating the adapters
with 25 units Klenow exo-, 1 mM dATP, 50 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.9, 10 mM
MgCl2, and 1 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 C. The product was again ethanol
precipitated and resuspended to a final concentration of 50 ?M.

> T-tailing was performed in a reaction containing 5 units Klenow exo-, 1 mM
dTTP, 50 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.9, 10 mM MgCl2, and 1 mM DTT. The
reaction proceeded for 1 h at 37 C. DNA was purified with 1.2 volumes of
AMPure XP beads. The custom Duplex Sequencing adapters were ligated by
combining 750 ng of Ttailed DNA with 250 pmol adapters in a reaction
containing 3,000 units T4 DNA ligase (Enzymatics), 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 10
mM MgCl2, 5 mM DTT, and 1 mM ATP. The reaction was incubated at 25 C for 15
min, and purified with 0.8 volumes of Ampure XP beads.

