---
title: Private Competitions and Crowdfunding Sources to Fund Bioinformatics Research
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
We would like to point our readers to a number of private channels for getting
funds to start new projects. Please let us know, if we missed something and we
can add it to the list.
<!--more-->

\-------------------------------

**Convey and Nimbix**

[The Accelerated Genomics Cloud Promotion](http://www.nimbix.net/tagcpromo/)

>

Convey and Nimbix are giving away $25,000 of cloud processing for genomics
applications.

To give researchers access to world-class HPC resources and to show them that
heterogeneous cloud computing is extremely powerful, yet simple and easy to
use, Convey and Nimbix are offering qualified applicants free runtime. Top
applicants may receive up to $1000 worth of runtime. Remaining qualified
applicants will receive $500 worth. First awards will be granted as soon as
the application review process allows. The promotion will end July 1 or once
all funding has been awarded. Therefore, interested participants are
encouraged to apply quickly by registering.

The Convey-Nimbix cloud genomics promotion launched on April 30, 2013 and ends
July 1, 2013, or once all funding has been awarded.

\----------------------------

**Cycle Computing**

[BigData, meet BigCompute: 1 Million Hours, 78 TB of genomic data analysis, in
1 week](http://blog.cyclecomputing.com/2012/10/bigdata-meet-bigcompute-1
-million-hours-utility-supercomputing.html)

> Cycle Computing BigScience Challenge Overview

About a year ago we were very excited to announce the Challenge, a contest
aimed at breaking the computation limits for any researchers working to answer
questions that will help humanity. We asked researchers all over the world to
think of normally unanswerable computational science questions, i.e. science
that was limited by the compute power they had available, describe their
efforts and how access to a Utility Supercomputer could push their research
forward, by making impossible science, possible.

As our part of the challenge, Cycle Computing offered $10,000 of compute time
on a Utility Supercomputer, with Amazon Web Services kindly providing an
additional $9,500 worth of compute time to the contest winner. From a field of
many researchers doing fantastic work to benefit humanity, our panel of judges
including industry luminaries such as Kevin Davies of Bio IT World, Peter
Shenkin of Schrodinger, Jason Stowe of Cycle Computing, and Matt Wood of AWS,
chose Alan Aspuru-Guzik of the Harvard University Chemistry department and the
Harvard Green Energy Project as the Runner-up, and Victor Ruotti from Jamie
Thomsons Stem Cell Lab at the Morgridge Institute for Research as the
BigScience 2011 challenge winner!

\------------------------------

**Innocentive**

At Innocentive website, individuals or companies list challenging problems and
award for solving them. Everyone is encouraged to join and solve those
problems, and the award goes the top performer. You can check the existing
problems [here](https://www.innocentive.com/ar/challenge/browse).

The following one is highly relevant to topics we cover, although the amount
offered is far less than [$100 million by US government for doing buzzword-
driven science](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/05/22/the-big-data-
fraud/).

[Identify Organisms from a Stream of DNA
Sequences](https://www.innocentive.com/ar/challenge/9933138)

AWARD: $1,000,000 USD | DEADLINE: 6/30/13 | ACTIVE SOLVERS: 2535 | POSTED:
12/28/12

This is a Reduction-to-Practice Challenge that requires written documentation
and delivery of source code implementing an algorithm that solves the problem.
A real-time online scoring utility and leaderboard will be available for this
Challenge beginning 13-Feb.

\--------------------------------------

**Kickstarter and other Crowdsourcing Websites**

Kickstarter used to fund small projects, but the amount of money being raised
increased substantially.

[FORM 1: An affordable, professional 3D printer - 2,068 backers -
**$2,945,885**](http://www.kickstarter.com/projects/formlabs/form-1-an-
affordable-professional-3d-printer?ref=card)

[Oculus Rift: Step Into the Game - 9,522 backers -
$2,437,429](http://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1523379957/oculus-rift-step-
into-the-game?ref=card)

[3Doodler: The World's First 3D Printing Pen by WobbleWorks LLC. - 26,457
backers - $2,344,134](http://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1351910088/3doodler-
the-worlds-first-3d-printing-pen?ref=card)

[Here](http://www.hongkiat.com/blog/crowdfunding-sites/) is a nice summary of
other crowd funding websites. They all take a cut from the money donated by
people, but the cut is much smaller than what parasites take from taxes (see
below).

\------------------------------------

**Difference between Government-funded Research and Crowdfunded Research**

Following two figures show the primary difference between government funded
and crowd-funded research.

![write-blog2](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/write-
blog2-300x225.png)

![write-blog](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/write-
blog3-300x225.png)

Confused? Haha, it is because there is no real difference. All money
ultimately come from the people. In case of 'government funding', the money as
tax is collected by force and you are made to feel bad for not paying it. In
case of crowd-funding, the sponsorship is voluntary, project is well-defined
and you are made to feel good to pay for it. Moreover, in the first case, a
large part gets wasted before a small part goes into sponsoring research, and
increasing amount from that small part is being taken away by [buzzword-driven
scientists](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/05/22/the-big-data-fraud/).

\-------------------

**"We Need Government Agencies, Because Crowd-sourcing Will Never Fund Math and Other Basic Science"**

Please express your opinion in favor of and against the above claim and we
will include those here.

