---
title: New York Times Propaganda Article Discredits Open Access
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
New York Times, the official mouthpiece of establishment, does not like open
access publication in science. That is the feeling you will have after reading
the 'sensational story' bashing open-access in their health section -
<!--more-->

[Scientific Articles Accepted (Personal Checks,
Too)](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/08/health/for-scientists-an-exploding-
world-of-pseudo-academia.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0)

It starts with narrating a conference scam. A group of scientists got duped by
registering in 'Entomology-2013', a fake conference that borrowed the name of
'Entomology 2013' and added a hyphen. The narration ended with a quote from
Steven Goodman -

> Steven Goodman, a dean and professor of medicine at Stanford and the editor
of the journal Clinical Trials, which has its own imitators, called this
phenomenon the dark side of open access, the movement to make scholarly
publications freely available.

Unfortunately, we are not as bright as Dr. Goodman to make that connection.
Everyday we receive emails from con-artists asking us to log into our Bank of
America account. The domain name of those links are slightly modified from
"bankofamerica.com", and many unsuspecting users end up revealing their
username/password by not noticing the extra 7 or extra hyphen in the link.
Those frauds are common, but **our Bank of America account is not open
access**.

The second part of the NY Times story has another dubious anecdote having
nothing to do with open-access and another meaningless quote from Dr. Goodman.

> But some researchers are now raising the alarm about what they see as the
proliferation of online journals that will print seemingly anything for a fee.
They warn that nonexperts doing online research will have trouble
distinguishing credible research from junk. Most people dont know the journal
universe, Dr. Goodman said. They will not know from a journals title if it is
for real or not.

Researchers also say that universities are facing new challenges in assessing
the rsums of academics. Are the publications they list in highly competitive
journals or ones masquerading as such?

Why not go check the links? The articles are open-access, and they should be
able to verify, whether the published paper was good or not.

Finally, the article reveals the real purpose of the 'sensational story'
(emphasis ours).

> The phenomenon has caught the attention of Nature, one of the most
competitive and well-regarded scientific journals. In a news report published
recently, the journal noted the rise of questionable operators and explored
whether it was better to blacklist them or **to create a white list of those
open-access journals that meet certain standards**.

Nature wants to create a club for 'recognized' open-access journals. We can
anticipate the next step, where they will allow citations only from those
'recognized' open-access journals. There goes Titus Brown's hope of his blog-
posts getting cited.

We have an easier solution. Maybe it is time for universities to change their
hiring rules. Why not hire scientists, who did high-quality scientific
research instead of hiring scientists, who 'published in Science and Nature'?
Aren't their review committees competent enough to read and understand papers?

\-------------------------------------

Marc Robinson-Rechavi forwarded us a thoughtful blog commentary on similar
topic.

[Predatory #OpenAccess publishers: whats the worst which can
happen?](http://people.unil.ch/marcrobinsonrechavi/2013/02/predatory-
openaccess-publishers-whats-the-worst-which-can-happen/)

We encourage readers to read his entire commentary, because he clearly sees
through the bushes and identifies the forest. Here are his concluding remarks
-

<blockquote

At worst, predatory open access does not seem worse than the status quo.

So can we stop discussing what seems to be mostly a non issue, and concentrate
on the reality of high quality publicly funded science locked up by commercial
publishers and unavailable?

\----------------------

Mike Eisen commented on the same NY Times article with an witty and
appropriate title -

[Door-to-door subscription scams: the dark side of The New York
Times](http://www.michaeleisen.org/blog/?p=1354)

> But if Gina Kolata and the NYT are really concerned about scams in science
publishing, they should look into the $10 BILLION DOLLARS of largely public
money that subscription publishers take in every year in return for giving the
scientific community access to the 90% of papers that are not published in
open access journals papers that scientists gave to the journals for free!
This ongoing insanity not only fleeces huge piles of cash from government and
university coffers, it denies the vast majority of the planets population
access to the latest discoveries of our scientists. And if the price we pay
for ending this insanity is a few gullible scientists falling for open access
spam, its worth it a million times over.

