---
title: Reinhart and Rogoff-Gate Reaction Shows Failure of 'Data Science'
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
A discovery of Excel spreadsheet error made in an important economic study
seemed to have shocked the data science community. First, we will report a
number of commentaries from various economic and non-economic bloggers. Our
view of the whole fiasco is added at the bottom.
<!--more-->

**Fernando Perez** (h/t: CTB, Lex) - 

["Literate computing" and computational reproducibility: IPython in the age of
data-driven journalism](http://blog.fperez.org/2013/04/literate-computing-and-
computational.html)

**Victoria Stodden** (h/t: CTB, Lex) - 

[What the Reinhart & Rogoff Debacle Really Shows: Verifying Empirical Results
Needs to be Routine](http://blog.stodden.net/2013/04/19/what-the-reinhart-
rogoff-debacle-really-shows-verifying-empirical-results-needs-to-be-routine/)

**Reinhart and Rogoff** \- 

[Reinhart-Rogoff Response to
Critique](http://blogs.wsj.com/economics/2013/04/16/reinhart-rogoff-response-
to-critique/)

**Bruce Krastrings at Zerohedge** \- 

["Econogate" and Japan](http://www.zerohedge.com/contributed/2013-04-21
/econogate-and-japan)

**Mish** \- 

[Excel Spreadsheets, Krugman, and a Question of
Logic](http://globaleconomicanalysis.blogspot.com/2013/04/excel-spreadsheets-
krugman-and-question.html)

**Acting Man** \- 

[The Reinhart Rogoff Study Controversy](http://www.acting-man.com/?p=22789)

**Nakedcapitalism** \- 

[Twisted Tale of Bad Math and Hubris: Global Austerity Based on a Spreadsheet
Error](http://www.nakedcapitalism.com/2013/04/twisted-tale-of-bad-math-and-
hubris-global-austerity-based-on-a-spreadsheet-error.html)

**Philip Pilkington** \- 

[Philip Pilkington: Defrocking Reinhart and Rogoff Controversy Ignores
Fundamental Issues in the Use and Abuse of Statistical
Studies](http://www.nakedcapitalism.com/2013/04/philip-pilkington-defrocking-
reinhart-and-rogoff-controversy-ignores-fundamental-issues-in-the-use-and-
abuse-of-statistical-studies.html)

\----------------------

The community reaction about Excel error and especially the responses from
'data scientists' show what kind of garbage is being sold as science these
days. The 'data science' approach is to feed a bunch of numbers to a
supposedly sophisticated computer program, and then trust the program to give
us insight about a natural process (or an economic system here). Even after it
was shown that minor changes in Excel spreadsheet could dramatically alter
Reinhart and Rogoff's conclusions regarding social austerity, nobody asked
questions on whether the entire study itself was meaningful. Does it really
make sense to take some numbers from 20 or so small countries spanning over
200 years to tell people of another different country to change their
behavior? Is money borrowed to build Golden Gate bridge equivalent to money
borrowed to bail our Goldman Sachs? Are those 'GDP' numbers reported by
various governments equivalent so that we can talk about their means or
medians? For all we know, US GDP went up by 500 billion yesterday, because
government decided to do the calculation differently.

[US GDP Will Be Revised Higher By $500 Billion Following Addition Of
"Intangibles" To Economy](http://www.zerohedge.com/news/2013-04-21/us-gdp-
will-be-revised-higher-500-billion-following-addition-intangibles-economy)

We have seen similar failure to ask critical questions during US housing
bubble, when everyone 'data scientist' agreed that the banks would not fail
based on their extremely sophisticated models. The models did not assume that
house prices could ever go down, because in the benchmark data they used
(1940-2007), house prices were never lower on aggregate. As it turned out, two
comedians asked more meaningful questions than thousands of 'data scientists'
hired by investment banks and rating agencies.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/UC31Oudc5Bg" frameborder="0"> </iframe>
