---
title: Cells as Living Calculators
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
![](http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/vaop/ncurrent/carousel/nature12148-f3
.2.jpg)
<!--more-->

A [synthetic biology paper from MIT](http://web.mit.edu/newsoffice/2013/cells-
as-living-calculators-0515.html) is good starting point for our hardware
section.

>

MIT engineers have transformed bacterial cells into living calculators that
can compute logarithms, divide, and take square roots, using three or fewer
genetic parts.

Inspired by how analog electronic circuits function, the researchers created
synthetic computation circuits by combining existing genetic parts, or
engineered genes, in novel ways.

The original paper [can be accessed from Nature's website](http://www.nature.c
om/nature/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/nature12148.html) for a small fee of
$199:

> A central goal of synthetic biology is to achieve multi-signal integration
and processing in living cells for diagnostic, therapeutic and biotechnology
applications1. Digital logic has been used to build small-scale circuits, but
other frameworks may be needed for efficient computation in the resource-
limited environments of cells2, 3. Here we demonstrate that synthetic analog
gene circuits can be engineered to execute sophisticated computational
functions in living cells using just three transcription factors. Such
synthetic analog gene circuits exploit feedback to implement logarithmically
linear sensing, addition, ratiometric and power-law computations. The circuits
exhibit Webers law behaviour as in natural biological systems4, operate over a
wide dynamic range of up to four orders of magnitude and can be designed to
have tunable transfer functions. Our circuits can be composed to implement
higher-order functions that are well described by both intricate biochemical
models and simple mathematical functions. By exploiting analog building-block
functions that are already naturally present in cells3, 5, this approach
efficiently implements arithmetic operations and complex functions in the
logarithmic domain. Such circuits may lead to new applications for synthetic
biology and biotechnology that require complex computations with limited
parts, need wide-dynamic-range biosensing or would benefit from the fine
control of gene expression.

If you can wait for few days, we will explain it to you for a princely sum of
$0.

