---
title: Why Are Sequencing Costs Falling in Italy and Europe?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
[In an earlier commentary, we argued](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2013/05/01
/are-researchers-accumulating-oceans-of-data-for-no-clear-purpose/) that
sequencing costs fell dramatically without having sufficient support system
built up due to misguided central planning of NIH. From 2000 onward, US
government funded all kinds of projects to get 'human genome sequenced for
cheaper than $1000' without thinking about consequences. In a market economy,
other components of ecosystem would have adjusted naturally.
<!--more-->

Instead of trusting our words, take a look at the semiconductor industry.
Rarely do you hear that microprocessors became very advanced but RAM companies
were left in the same stage as in early 90s. From time to time, companies do
miscalculate and create glut for their products. However, such companies [get
punished and go out of business](http://www.zerohedge.com/news/2013-05-01
/hank-paulson-burns-another-electric-car-maker-goes-flames). The same is not
true for bureaucrats and philosophers hired by government.

Luca Venturini (who we believe is from Italy) wrote to us in twitter -

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/05/Capture1-300x66.png)

The answer is easy. When world's largest economy gets more and more centrally
planned, every other smaller country and economy will have to suffer from the
consequences.
[Source](http://www.usgovernmentspending.com/us_20th_century_chart.html)

![](http://www.usgovernmentspending.com/include/us_total_spending_20c.png)

Speaking of prices of sequencing and other biological instruments, US
government is the largest elephant in the room. How big?
[Here](http://www.homolog.us/CI/index.php/charts/country) is the relevant
chart from [our trends section](http://www.homolog.us/CI/index.php/charts),
which we reproduce below. In Italy, you buy Illumina machines, not Italian
sequencing instruments, right?

![Capture3](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/05/Capture31-264x300.png)

Among all NIH bodies, cancer agencies have the highest amount of money. As a
result, everyone tries to please them, everyone dances in the tune of their
policies and at the least everyone tries to link their research finding with
cancer. If tomorrow NIH shuts down cancer agency and allocates the entire fund
to stomach flu of [Goblins](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goblin), we will see
an explosion in the number of experts studying stomach flu in Goblin.

Here was his follow up question -

![Capture2](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/05/Capture21-300x64.png)

Let us compare the situation with another central planning gone amok. Since
end of world war II and Bretton Woods conference, all world governments
decided to tie their banking system with US dollar. As a result, their
economies get strongly affected by interest rate manipulation of US central
bank. Over the last 15 years, US central bank kept the interest rate too low
causing housing bubbles all over the world. In Italy, Greece, Spain and
Ireland 'mere fact that interest rates were low pushed people to borrow more
to buy houses'. You now see the consequences, don't you? Similarly in case of
sequencing, you are talking about consequences (symptoms) and we are trying to
identify the disease. If we do not try to find the right disease, the proposed
centrally planned solution will create another glut somewhere else - maybe in
GWAS studies.

