---
title: 'Global Warming Update: Here is Halloween and Boo !!!'
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
**Fact 1.** No matter how you slice and dice the data, you will not find earth's temperature to be above where it was 17 years ago, while the carbon dioxide level has been growing steadily due to globalization. 
<!--more-->

**Fact 2.** Fact 1 is very inconvenient for a group of people, who call themselves 'scientists'. 

![](http://www.acting-man.com/blog/media/2013/10/sea-surface-temp-anomaly.png)

However, Fact 1 and Fact 2 are superseded by an even more important -

**Fact 3.** This is the month of October and Halloween time !! This year, we will be dressing like the latest IPCC report. 

[Leading Scientists Want You to Be Afraid?](http://www.acting-
man.com/?p=26308)

>

The IPCC recently released its 'boo!' report, which is supposed to scare us
into accepting a great deal more government control over our lives as well as
much higher taxes on account of global warming which allegedly industrial
civilization is responsible for.

You can read what we would refer to as the 'professional scaremongers
perspective' in this article in the Atlantic. It's 5 minutes to midnight! We
can no longer delay! Taxes must be raised immediately! Cars? Forget it, they
are poison! Actually, all of humanity is really a virus on the face of the
planet, right? Especially what is generally referred to as civilization is
apparently just too ghastly to contemplate.

Interestingly, mainstream media of only one country is allowed to tell the
truth, and that happens to be China. [Howard Winn
reports](http://www.scmp.com/business/article/1309376/inconvenient-17-year-
pause-global-warming?page=all) at South China Morning Post -

[The inconvenient 17-year pause in global
warming](http://www.scmp.com/business/article/1309376/inconvenient-17-year-
pause-global-warming?page=all)

> We see the fact that the earth's temperature hasn't risen for the past 17
years is causing ructions within the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC). Its previous forecasts of catastrophic consequences unless the world
reduces its use of fossil fuels have been the driving force behind the
billions spent by governments and corporations on mitigating the perceived
problem.

The IPCC is due to issue its fifth major report - the Fifth Assessment Report
- since 1992 on the state of the earth's environment and climate. According to
leaked documents, the governments that finance the IPCC want a more adequate
explanation for the 17-year "pause" in global warming than is currently to be
found in the massive three-volume report. The dispute centres on the extent
temperatures will rise in the future, and how much of the rise over the past
150 years - a total of 0.8 degrees Celsius - is due to human activity and how
much to natural causes such as sun spot activity or ocean cycles. The IPCC's
draft report says it is 95 per cent confident that global warming is due to
human activity, compared with 90 per cent in its 2007 report. Many scientists
believe that level of confidence is unwarranted.

One of the more obvious difficulties to resolve is that although there has
been an enormous production of carbon dioxide over the past 17 years, the
temperature hasn't changed. The Economist noted in a recent piece, "The world
added roughly 100 billion tonnes of carbon to the atmosphere between 2000 and
2010. That is about a quarter of all the CO2 put there by humanity since
1750."

And here comes the hilarious part (see in bold):

>

Then there is the inconvenient truth that the sea ice in the arctic is 60 per
cent greater than this time last year when it stood at a record low. And this
is before the winter freeze starts. When the Northwest Passage from the
Atlantic to the Pacific opened up in August 2007 it caused headlines around
the world. **In 2007 Wieslaw Maslowski, a researcher at the Naval Postgraduate
School, Monterey, California, famously predicted the Arctic would be free of
ice by 2013. But the Northwest Passage has been closed all this year by pack
ice, trapping some 20 yachts whose owners presumably believed it would be open
for years to come.**

If those yacht owners bought their yachts by not seeing any housing-bubble in
2007, we cannot feel too sorry for them :)

![](http://www.acting-man.com/blog/media/2013/10/ipcc-titanic.jpg)

