---
title: Collaborative Effort to Learn About Oxford Nanopore's Data Ends with Chase
  by Lawyers
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
![](http://m.c.lnkd.licdn.com/mpr/mpr/shrink_200_200/p/1/000/045/393/3d790fb.j
pg)
<!--more-->

About a month back, Dr. Gerry H. of AssureRx Health [asked in 'Linked
in'](http://www.linkedin.com/groups/What-is-it-Oxford-
Nanopore-1902623.S.5806721398109929472):

> I am not trying to be mean here, but the small amount of data that they have
shared is terrible, they only show data from a small portion of lambda phage,
and the Mini-Ion, which I have used, produced poor quality results on the same
prep that I used with Nextera chemistry from the MiSeq with Illumina quality
scores of >40. Would highly recommend NABsys or NanoBio, although they have
not produced compelling single nucleotide sequence data yet either that I have
seen.

Has anyone produced compelling data from the Mini-ION?

A healthy discussion followed, with many others sharing their Oxford Nanopore
experiences at the ASHG or asking for details from Dr. Gerry H. In fact, so
many persons sent email request for data that he volunteered to build a
website. The discussion was very constructive, but the end was not, as you can
see from his recent comment.

>

Folks-

I am incredibly frustrated. Having put together the content for a web site,
and about to launch, with written permission from several companies, I have
been contacted by several lawyers who say they will "take legal action" if I
proceed (this is not BS). Is anyone going to either AGBT or the MMTC in SF? I
would be glad to show you the data that I have in some kind of private setting
at either meeting, but I am not prepared to get sued by some idiotic lawyers.
If anyone has a better idea, let me know. I will at least be able to show some
of the published data in a chapter for the 2nd edition of "NGS Informatics" by
Stuart Brown.

Any and all constructive ideas are welcome, but if I get bashed here about
this, then I would ask you to put yourself in my shoes, and think about how
destructive and expensive lawsuits can be - Gerry

That surely appears to be a new way of doing science.

\--------------------------------------------------------------------

To be fair to Oxford Nanopore, we add Nick Loman's disagreement about Dr.
Gerry H.'s comment:

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/12/Capture5-300x113.png)

Does that mean he is lying about the entire thing, including attempt to build
the website? We remain as confused by this saga as by Oxford Nanopore's own
claims.

@OmicsOmicsBlog chimes in -

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/12/Capture6-300x50.png)

