---
title: A Bioinformatician is a Technician, no More
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Casey Bergman told students, why they should do PhD in
bioinformatics/computational biology.
<!--more-->

[Top N Reasons To Do A Ph.D. or Post-Doc in Bioinformatics/Computational
Biology](http://caseybergman.wordpress.com/2012/07/31/top-n-reasons-to-
do-a-ph-d-or-post-doc-in-bioinformaticscomputational-biology/)

Our response ["Top N Reasons NOT to do a Ph.D. in Bioinformatics/Computational
Biology"](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2012/08/11/top-n-reasons-not-to-
do-a-ph-d-in-bioinformaticscomputational-biology/) started with the following
paragraph -

>

Bioinformatics has many layers, as discussed in the following articles.

[A beginners guide to bioinformatics part
I](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2011/07/22/a-beginners-guide-to-bioinformatics-
part-i/)

[A beginners guide to bioinformatics part
II](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2011/07/22/a-beginners-guide-to-
bioinformatics-part-ii/)

Unless you can reach Layer 5, you remain a glorified technician in the bigger
picture of things. Do you really think that is good enough reason to get a
PhD?

[The following sad story](http://marcowanger.blogspot.hk/2013/11/is-
bioinformatician-we-free-rider.html) suggests that we were not unnecessarily
negative.

>

Dear ***,

You probably know I desperately want to write up a tool paper last year (***),
at that moment my biggest fear was not B** in fact, but was the expectation
that I would be placed middle-of-no-where in the authorship in their Biology
paper. I guessed right.

Not sure if it is normal, but just got very frustrated in this lab. Yesterday
**** summoned me to his office, told me that my position was shifted backward
(from 2nd to 4th).

The situation is like that. We developed ***, we used it to discover those
******* event, all validated. Among them, the Biology lab already did some
work on one of the ****** (long before we developed ***). They used that as an
example to do more in depth work and submitted the ****** ****. I did the
submission phase works. My position was 2nd. The 1st is a former student who
devoted his PhD life on it.

The paper came back with revision. Lots of biology questions. I did my part
and proposed the Bioinformatics response. I thought it was alright. Yesterday
**** told me he had discussed with ******** in the *****-***** meeting, and
made a decision to shift me backward, because their lab members worked hard on
revision phase and did many experiments. I had no choice and said it is fair.

Maybe it is fair. I do not argue that the wet-lab team deserve important
positions because they worked hard. I just couldn't believe (1) we did well
and there was little Bioinformatics related question, (2) then it is my fault
to contribute little in this revision phase. I also spent my last 1.5 year on
this. If I didn't propose/argue with them to publish *** independently. Then
what do I get now for working on this in this post-doc life?

For wet-lab members, they all have their projects. And mine is to work to help
them get things out. Am I a technician?

When they worked hard on wet-lab experiment, do we just sit down and take a
nap?

In ****'s office, I did not argue at all. I accepted it because it is entirely
not up to me, and it was a decision they have already made. ****just re-
directed the message / informed me. **** re-iterated we are not pet
bioinformatician, but I think we are just *free-rider* in biology's people
eye.

**** said to me such decision is to prevent the wet-lab people think we are free-rider, get it their lab and get important position in the paper. And this decision will make them relieve. So basically it means I am the one to be sacrificed for fear of morale hazard in wet-lab team. And by doing so, I can work them the wet-lab team more closely. I have no objection, but again, I know I have lots of morale to spare. 

Regards,

****** 

\-----------------------------------------------------------------

In the same context, readers may also like our other commentary -

[To Do (PhD in Bioinformatics) or Not To Do? That is the
Question](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/02/06/to-do-phd-in-
bioinformatics-or-not-to-do-that-is-the-question/)

[When to Leave the Academia (University
Cartel)?](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2012/12/03/when-to-leave-the-
academia-university-cartel/)

Overall, our views remain the same. The university system in USA is mostly an
unproductive and government-supported cartel, whose primary purpose is to
support the older members at the cost of younger ones. Younger you are, better
off you will be by running away from it.

