---
title: Study History and Read Papers Written by 'Dinosaurs' (#GWAS)
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
[Source: Ray Dailo](http://www.zerohedge.com/news/2013-08-11/bridgewaters-ray-
dalio-warns-eurocrisis-not-over)
<!--more-->

![Doomed-To-Repeat-History](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/08/Doomed-To-Repeat-History-261x300.jpg)

\-------------------------------------

Huge amount of money gets spent on genome wide association studies (#GWAS)
with the promises that they will lead to finding cures of complex diseases,
but how good are those promises? In today's twitter brawl, BioMickWatson said
that #GWAS contributed to human knowledge. Dan Graur wanted to find out, but
he could not understand even the layman's summary of a recent #GWAS paper. The
following two entertaining posts present his experience:

[#ENCODE, #GWAS, and #Pentecostalism: A true religion or a Sokal-like
hoax](http://judgestarling.tumblr.com/post/57993700472/encode-gwas-and-
pentecostalism-a-true-religion-or)

[#ENCODE, #GWAS, and #Pentecostalism: Part
2](http://judgestarling.tumblr.com/post/58019239920/encode-gwas-and-
pentecostalism-part-2)

The author of the paper agreed that the summary was too complex and we offered
a way out -

![Capture3](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/08/Capture34-294x300.png)

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/08/Capture18-300x196.png)

\------------------------------------------

What is the bigger issue here? Is Dan Graur complaining because he does not
understand all these new cool developments, or is #GWAS another [faddish
branch of science as Ken Weiss
argued](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/07/30/battle-over-gwas-ken-
weiss-edition/)? BioMickWatson tried to discredit Dan Graur's opinion as 'out
dated dinosaur', but we believe that is very disingenuous.

![Capture2](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/08/Capture27-300x138.png)

Dan Graur continues to do active research in population genetics and
evolutionary biology, and was an author of the paper on genome comparison of
social insects that we linked the other day.

[Is Social Behavior Hardware or Software
Coded?](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/08/08/is-social-behavior-
hardware-or-software-coded/)

So a better way to discredit him would be to say that evolution and population
genetics are irrelevant for #ENCODE and #GWAS, which is Dan's point as well
([#ENCODE is closer to ID than
evolution](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/07/12/nothing-is-so-alien-to-
the-human-mind-as-the-idea-of-randomness/)). On the relevance of population
biology to #GWAS, Dan Graur presented one paper, and even its abstract shows
(emphasized by us) where the conflict between the 'cool new things' and
'dinosaur's research' lies.

[A Reading List of One
Article](http://judgestarling.tumblr.com/post/58031330506/a-reading-list-of-
one-article)

> Population genetics is fundamental to our understanding of evolution, and
mutations are essential raw materials for evolution. In this introduction to
more detailed papers that follow, we aim to provide an oversight of the ?eld.
We review current knowledge on mutation rates and their harmful and bene?cial
effects on ?tness and then consider theories that predict the fate of
individual mutations or the consequences of mutation accumulation for
quantitative traits. **Many advances in the past built on models that treat
the evolution of mutations at each DNA site independently, neglecting linkage
of sites on chromosomes and interactions of effects between sites (epistasis).
We review work that addresses these limitations, to predict how mutations
interfere with each other.** An understanding of the population genetics of
mutations of individual loci and of traits affected by many loci helps in
addressing many fundamental and applied questions: for example, how do
organisms adapt to changing environments, how did sex evolve, which DNA
sequences are medically important, why do we age, which genetic processes can
generate new species or drive endangered species to extinction, and how should
policy on levels of potentially harmful mutagens introduced into the
environment by humans be determined?

It is possible that those 'old' notions of population genetics are wrong, but
in science, the new guys have the responsibility to actually prove them wrong
before making bold new statements.

