---
title: If Your University Shuts Down, Are you Still Tenured?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
In an earlier commentary, we discussed -
<!--more-->

[Tenure-track is Seven Year Post-doc, but What Exactly is Tenure
Today?](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/07/25/tenure-track-is-seven-
year-post-doc-but-what-exactly-is-tenure-today/)

While on the topic, let us take another look at the money flow within the
University system.

Here is a rough model of how a university runs. It has four sources of money -
(i) Federal grants, (ii) state grants, (iii) tuition from students and (iv)
donations from wealthy individuals. The students are paying the organization
to get trained so that they find employment. Federal and state government are
also paying the organization so that students get trained to get jobs. Do you
get the role colleges and universities serve in the society? Leaving aside
private donors, here is a cartoon diagram showing the model. You can click on
the images to see in bigger window.

![homolog](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/homolog-
300x203.png)

Next, let us take a look at the actual money flow. Anyone, who does not jump
out of his chair after seeing the following chart should possibly get his head
checked. It is borrowed from [ Thoughts on Student Debt: Update - By Doug
Short](http://advisorperspectives.com/dshort/commentaries/College-Tuition-and-
Fees-130718.php).

![Federal-Loans-to-Students-Q1-2013](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/07/Federal-Loans-to-Students-Q1-2013-300x180.gif)

The above chart can be better understood in the context of the following
second chart.

![](http://advisorperspectives.com/dshort/charts/inflation/CPI-categories-
plus-college-tuition-since-2000.gif)

Pause for a moment and think about what is going on.

1\. The university system is raising prices enormously. Not only the rate of
change is higher than inflation, but the trend remains unbroken since 2002.
Therefore, university professors never realized that 2007-2008 happened, even
though the rest of country are suffering from it.

2\. Despite such increase in prices, tenure-track professors are complaining
about how much life sucks.

3\. They do have a point, because all money raised is being eaten up by the
parasites and is barely 'tricking down' to junior players. Check "[Bureaucrats
Paid $250,000 Feed Outcry Over College
Costs](http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-11-14/bureaucrats-paid-250-000-feed-
outcry-over-college-costs.html)".

4\. Since 2008, the entire system has been supported by massive rise in
student debt. The above chart shows only half of the rise in student debt and
does not show the private part.

5\. Student unemployment rate has been rising since 2008 and here is the chart
of US youth unemployment.

![](http://blogs.reuters.com/felix-salmon/files/2011/12/fredgraph.png)

So, despite raising prices by very high rate, the universities are unable to
do what they are supposed to do.

Think about that for a second. You were a customer of a pizza store between
2002-2008, because it properly delivered your pizza even though it raised
prices quite a bit. Then, after 2008, the store continued to hike prices, but
stopped delivering pizza to you. How long would that business survive?

It is a miracle that the universities are still surviving, and bigger miracle
that college professor have no clue about how unsustainable the organizations
are. We will see thousands of colleges and universities close in this country
over the coming years. [US currently has ~4,200 colleges and
universities](http://www.infoplease.com/ipa/A0908742.html), and we will be
surprised if even 1/4th of them last a decade. The process has already started
in California, where the largest community college with 100K students is being
shut down. The state cut the funding of City College of San Francisco to save
the UCs. Then, the accreditation agency pulled the plug claiming that the
college does not have enough money to continue operation. Poof, it will be
gone.

[City College of San Francisco Enrollment Plunges After Threatened
Accreditation Loss](http://blogs.kqed.org/newsfix/2013/07/25/104635/ccsf-
accreditation)

![](http://blogs.kqed.org/newsfix/files/2013/03/photo-1024x764.jpg)

Maybe the above discussion will give the 42-year <del>old</del> young Harvard
professors some real issues to write about instead of inane commentaries on
how 'tenure-track is seven year post-doc'.

