---
title: 'Google Censorship: Scariest Thing for Academic Freedom'
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Please forward this message widely, because it is the scariest thing that can
happen to academic freedom of researchers in this country.
<!--more-->

Today Dr. Elhaik, who published a population biology paper titled ["The
Missing Link of Jewish European Ancestry: Contrasting the Rhineland and the
Khazarian Hypotheses"](http://gbe.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2012/12/14/
gbe.evs119.short?rss=1) in Genome Biology and Evolution, contacted us and
reported that his lab website is censored by Google. Let us walk you through
the process step by step.

[Here is Dr. Elhaik's lab website](http://eelhaik.aravindachakravartilab.org/)
at John's Hopkins University.

![Capture4](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/05/Capture41-300x149.png)

Here is what you find when you search 'eran elhaik' in Google, Yahoo and Bing.

![Capture3](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/05/Capture35-300x185.png)

![Capture2](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/05/Capture23-300x177.png)

![Capture1](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/05/Capture17-300x196.png)

Do you see the difference? His lab website is not the top hit in Google, even
though it was right there yesterday. In fact, his website is not found in the
first few pages of Google hits. We had patience to check only three pages
before deciding about reporting on this oddity. Other two search engines
report him at the top.

This is really scary for academics trying to do independent scholarly
research. The best way to challenge them is through finding flaws in their
papers and publishing competing papers. Many bad scientific theories were
discarded by detailed investigation, and we expect the same to happen to Dr.
Elhaik's results, if he is wrong. Asking Google to block websites ad hoc and
imposing censorship on him bypasses the whole process.

What next? Will Google be asked by government to block Dan Graur from its
search engine for creating trouble for NIH-funded ENCODE projects? Will Mark
Ptashne be blocked for [challenging epigenetics
projects](http://www.pnas.org/content/110/18/7101.full), where plenty of
government money is flowing?

We discussed about [medical importance of his research in this
link](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2013/05/08/jewish-race-and/).

Dr. Elhaik sent a chilling group email that also includes very convincing
analysis of Khazar hypothesis. It is from a paper he is currently working on
and therefore we decided to remove his discovery from the attached note. If
you are checking our mailbox through homeland security website, please click
on the second email from the top.

>

Hi All,

Call me crazy but today my website has disappeared from google and I am pretty
sure I am being followed.

So. here is one of the final pieces of evidence to the Khazarian Hypothesis,
to be published by all of you in the case that I will have a date with my
maker.

[....]

The map without the legend was already posted to my facebook page.

I am probably just being paranoid, but just in case.

Feel free to make fun of me if I'll get past this.

