---
title: '"Researchers Opt to Limit Uses of Open-access Publications"'
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Nature journal [posted an article](http://www.nature.com/news/researchers-opt-
to-limit-uses-of-open-access-publications-1.12384) in their news section on
legal issues surrounding open access publication. The most important questions
are 'how free is free' and 'how open is open' as summarized in this paragraph.
<!--more-->

>

**Open, but not open?**

A paper that is free to read on the Internet is not necessarily legally open
to other uses such as mining the text with computer software to draw
conclusions and mix it with other work, distributing translations of the text
or commercially selling republished versions in derivative publications.

All legal details of open access publication are hidden within short words
such as CC, BY, SA, etc. Presence or absence of each word has different
meaning to the end-user and that meaning may change between jurisdictions. Add
that to [fair use clause](http://www.copyright.gov/fls/fl102.html) of various
copyright laws and you have a complete mess in hand.

Here are brief descriptions of various code words in Creative Commons from
[Wiki](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Creative_Commons_license#Non-
commercial_licenses), but you are advised to [go through the entire legal
documents](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/) for doing anything important.

**Creative Commmons (cc)**

>

The original set of licenses all grant the "baseline rights", such as the
right to distribute the copyrighted work worldwide, without changes, at no
charge.

The details of each of these licenses depends on the version, and comprises a
selection of four conditions:

**Attribution (by) **

Licensees may copy, distribute, display and perform the work and make
derivative works based on it only if they give the author or licensor the
credits in the manner specified by these.

**Share-alike (sa) **

Licensees may distribute derivative works only under a license identical to
the license that governs the original work. (See also copyleft.)

The following two clauses are not free software licenses, according to either
DFSG or the Free Software Foundation, and cannot be used in contexts that
require these freedoms, such as Wikipedia.

**Non-commercial (nc)**

Licensees may copy, distribute, display, and perform the work and make
derivative works based on it only for noncommercial purposes.

**Non-derivative (nd)**

Licensees may copy, distribute, display and perform only verbatim copies of
the work, not derivative works based on it.

\-------------

**Similarity with Software Licenses**

You may notice that many legal issues are identical to licenses for releasing
software, but software-related questions are somewhat more settled with [their
legal history](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GNU_General_Public_License#Legal_s
tatus).

[Software Licenses in Bioinformatics Programs and Their Legal
Implications](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/10/19/software-licenses-in-
bioinformatics-programs-and-their-legal-implications/)

[Sanger Dropping Broads GATK after License
Change](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/11/20/sanger-dropping-broads-gatk-
after-license-change/)

\----------------

**Placing ads on website - commercial or non-commercial?**

One hot topic of contention is whether Creative Commons license allows sidebar
ads on website, or whether ads are considered commercial use. Based on reading
following threads, it appears to us that the creators of Creative Commons do
not consider placing ads to be commercial use, but the jury is still out. They
are still working on explicit definition of 'commercial use'.

[Defining
Noncommercial](http://wiki.creativecommons.org/Defining_Noncommercial)

[Creative Commons "Non-Commercial" Content on Ad-Supported
Sites](http://blogoscoped.com/archive/2008-02-07-n77.html)

> Ive asked the Wikipedia mailing list a while ago, and recently received
another confirmation from Creative Commons Lawrence Lessig: yes, the CC
organization believes this being OK is the best reading of the license. Not
that theyre saying youre allowed to directly sell the CC content or anything,
but youre allowed to display ads if you use CC-NC content. But its also a
matter of how you display ads, Lawrence disclaims, saying that there could be
certain advertising schemes that take it too far.

(It should be noted though that the Creative Commons organization does not
determine whether a judge would agree with their interpretation, in case
someone would get sued over using NC content on an ad-supported site. In the
end, perhaps such a case would go back to what the license says and not what
interpretations of the license say.

[Is it legal to use Creative Commons licensed media on ad supported
website?](https://legaladvice.rocketlawyer.com/questions/f2ef3a2499/is-it-
legal-to-use-creative-commons-licensed-media/)

> Response: Maxwell Felsheim, Attorney at Hellmuth & Johnson

It would depend on what type of creative common license the media is licensed
under. There are 7 different creative common licenses, and each allows you to
use the work in a different way, and for different purposes. So without any
further information on the type of license, I cannot answer your questions.
Check out http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ for more info on the various
types of creative commons licenses.

\------------------

**Where is it going?**

We have no clue, but following factors are worth considering.

**Global access of internet:**Questions of open access and Creative Commons license came in 2000s and not 1980s because of the internet. In 1980, nobody was asking about opening up all journal publications, because journals were all paper-based and printing and mailing paper journals to all corners of the world were both expensive. With internet, the costs of 'printing' and distribution have become insignificant, and so the question arises about who should get the benefit of reduced cost. The intellectual effort needed to [write a novel like Les Misrables](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Les_Mis%C3%A9rables) is possibly the same in 2000 as in 1862. So, the second question is how the creator of original content would be rewarded for his efforts. 

**Three parties in a contract**: A contract is usually an agreement between three parties - two parties, who sign on the dotted line and the state that enforces it. If the state is weak or refuses to enforce a contract, there is no meaningful agreement. That consideration will be important in deciding the fate of various open-source agreements, because we believe the centralized US-based order of prior era will not last for too long. 

In fact, the legal question regarding speed of electronic communication,
enforceability of contract and weak central state already played out in a
different arena (US property law) and remains to be a huge unsorted mess. We
do not have time to go into all the details, but in our understanding, anyone
buying real property in USA after 2002 have significant less legal right than
in earlier era ([link](http://www.nakedcapitalism.com/2011/03/on-the-clouded-
title-mess-and-the-difficulties-of-cleaning-it-up.html),
[link](http://www.nakedcapitalism.com/2012/10/so-where-is-schneiderman-
computerized-robosigning-has-made-its-debut.html)).

