---
title: piRNA Databases
categories:
- ncRNA
---
[piRNA bank in India](http://pirnabank.ibab.ac.in/)
<!--more-->

Here is the LOL part.

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/ncrna/wp-
content/uploads/sites/3/2013/01/Capture1-300x130.png)

Yada, yada, yada.....and why not add - "also send the letter through the
national hierarchy with Queen of England handing it to prime minister of India
in a joint press conference."

Happens only in India !!

\---------------------------

Compare that with China.

[deepBase](http://deepbase.sysu.edu.cn/)

[Here](http://deepbase.sysu.edu.cn/download.php) is the download page, and you
find everything you need.

\------------------------

[piRNA cluster database](http://www.uni-
mainz.de/FB/Biologie/Anthropologie/492_ENG_HTML.php)

\--------------------------

[piwi-interacting RNA - McManus lab](http://mcmanuslab.ucsf.edu/node/266)

The above link provides very good introduction to piRNAs.

> Before it was known that Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) are associated with
argonaute proteins of the Piwi clade, this class of small RNAs was given a
variety of different names in the literature. One of the first groups to
identify this class of RNAs as unique in mammals (based on their longer size
as compared to microRNAs) named them germline small RNAs or gsRNAs, based on
their high prevalence in the male germline (Watanabe, 2006), though this
nomenclature is used uncommonly. Another nomenclature controversy persists in
the field regarding the conservation of piRNAs between different species. For
example, in some species piRNAs sequences frequently map to transposable
and/or repeat elements and are thus referred to as repeat-associated small
interfering RNAs or rasiRNAs, which are now considered a specific type of
piRNA. In addition, it is now recognized that the class of 21U RNAs that are
highly expressed in the C. elegans germline do in fact interact with conserved
Piwi proteins and are now considered bona fide piRNAs (Wang, 2008), despite
the fact that they are still referred to as 21U RNAs.

Similar to the miRBase database for miRNAs, all unique cloned piRNAs have been
assigned accession numbers and can be found catalogued online at piRNABank.
Accession numbers consist of a three letter species designation, followed by
the letters piRNA and a six digit number that is assigned to sequences roughly
in the order that they were cloned and reported in the literature. For
example, H. sapiens piRNA-1 is designated hsa_piR_000001.

\----------------------------

[RNAdb2.0, an expanded database of mammalian non-coding
RNAs](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1751534/)

[Website in Australia](http://research.imb.uq.edu.au/rnadb/)

In June 2012, the RNAdb 2.0 database was officially retired. Oh well....

\---------------------------

Anything else? The Australian website mentioned about starting a new website
called RNAcentral.

