---
title: A survey of tools for variant analysis of next-generation genome sequencing
  data
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
A paper that lists 205 bioinformatics tools without mentioning a single genome
assembler !!! Where is [Cortex](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2013/01/11/high-
throughput-microbial-population-genomics-using-the-cortex-variation-
assembler/)?
<!--more-->

[Link](http://m.bib.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2013/01/21/bib.bbs086.ful
l)

> Recent advances in genome sequencing technologies provide unprecedented
opportunities to characterize individual genomic landscapes and identify
mutations relevant for diagnosis and therapy. Specifically, whole-exome
sequencing using next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies is gaining
popularity in the human genetics community due to the moderate costs,
manageable data amounts and straightforward interpretation of analysis
results. While whole-exome and, in the near future, whole-genome sequencing
are becoming commodities, data analysis still poses significant challenges and
led to the development of a plethora of tools supporting specific parts of the
analysis workflow or providing a complete solution. Here, we surveyed 205
tools for whole-genome/whole-exome sequencing data analysis supporting five
distinct analytical steps: quality assessment, alignment, variant
identification, variant annotation and visualization. We report an overview of
the functionality, features and specific requirements of the individual tools.
We then selected 32 programs for variant identification, variant annotation
and visualization, which were subjected to hands-on evaluation using four data
sets: one set of exome data from two patients with a rare disease for testing
identification of germline mutations, two cancer data sets for testing variant
callers for somatic mutations, copy number variations and structural
variations, and one semi-synthetic data set for testing identification of copy
number variations. Our comprehensive survey and evaluation of NGS tools
provides a valuable guideline for human geneticists working on Mendelian
disorders, complex diseases and cancers.

