---
title: A Free Market Approach to Improving Human Health
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
In USA, cockroaches (also known as politicians) built a giant website to
improve the health of the people. The website [costs at least $600
million](http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-12-10/hidden-obamacare-website-
costs-show-lack-of-transparency.html), contains 500 million lines of code and
often fails to work.
<!--more-->

\-----------------------------------------------------------------------

That led us to look for what other parts of the world are doing, and we came
across an innovative way to improve health in one of the free-est economies,
namely China.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/NsR3FAJkTm0" frameborder="0"> </iframe>


LA Times reports -

[Cockroach farms multiplying in China](http://www.latimes.com/world/la-fg-c1
-china-cockroach-20131015-dto,0,4704825.htmlstory#axzz2nbVgOF2R)

> The 43-year-old businessman is the largest cockroach producer in China (and
thus probably in the world), with six farms populated by an estimated 10
million cockroaches. He sells them to producers of Asian medicine and to
cosmetic companies that value the insects as a cheap source of protein as well
as for the cellulose-like substance on their wings.

Even when they are breeding cockroaches, they show respect to American brands
more than other ones :)

> The favored breed for this purpose is the Periplaneta americana, or American
cockroach, a reddish-brown insect that grows to about 1.6 inches long and,
when mature, can fly, as opposed to the smaller, darker, wingless German
cockroach.

On rare occasions, some cockroaches desert the farm to enjoy the outside
world. For example, this year -

>

At least one million cockroaches have escaped a farm in China where they were
being bred for use in traditional medicine, a report said.

The cockroaches fled the facility in Dafeng, in the eastern province of
Jiangsu, for surrounding cornfields earlier this month after an "unknown
perpetrator" destroyed the plastic greenhouse where they were raised, the
Modern Express newspaper said.

Cockroach or website, which medicine will you take?

