---
title: International Appeal for the Protection of Academic Independence
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
We encourage readers (excluding those from Harvard, MIT, MSU and Caltech) to
take a look at [Steve Keen's latest blog
commentary](http://www.debtdeflation.com/blogs/2013/03/04/international-
appeal-for-the-protection-of-academic-independence/). Few snippets are posted
below:
<!--more-->

> Universities grew out of the idea of establishing a place where freedom of
research, education and scholarship is protected and beyond venal influence.
They serve the common good and in turn are supported by the community.

......

Against this background, it is self-evident that a public university should
neither cooperate with nor accept sponsorship from institutions associated
with public scandal or unethical conduct. That is damaging to the academic
reputation of any university. And it impinges upon the independence of the
scholars concerned, particularly those directly funded by such institutions,
undermining their status as guarantors of independence and ethically-minded
scholarship.

The University of Zurich was born of this same spirit of independent thinking
in 1833. It is the first university in Europe to be founded by a democratic
state instead of by either a monarch or the church. This proud claim stands to
this day on the universitys website. The question is: are todays universities
still sufficiently independent in an age of cooperation and sponsorship?

In April 2012, the Executive Board of the University of Zurich concluded a
cooperation agreement, in camera, with the top management of UBS (Union Bank
of Switzerland). The agreement entails sponsoring of the university by UBS to
the tune of 100 million Swiss francs and the establishment of a UBS
International Centre of Economics in Society within the scope of the
university. Neither the public nor the research and teaching staff were asked
their opinion. The agreement between the university and UBS was concluded
secretly in the spring of 2012.

This procedure brings the issue of sponsorship into sharp focus. The Executive
Board of the University concedes that the bank is using the university as a
platform to further its interests. However, UBS is a particular case of a
business that has been shown in the past to have engaged in unethical
practices. The fact that the bank was able to place its logo at the University
of Zurich has nothing to do with scholarship and everything to do with
marketing.

It is a glaring example of the problematic nature of academic sponsorship. But
there are many more instances, in other European countries, of questionable
university sponsorship deals. In one case, in June 2011, Deutsche Bank had to
withdraw from a controversial sponsorship arrangement because of justified
public criticism.

