---
title: Bootstrapped Genome Project (ii) - Planning Stage
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
For previous commentary on the same topic, please [check
here](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2013/03/04/sequester-special-a-bootstrapped-
genome-project-i/).
<!--more-->

The 'genome project' team decided to meet in Wisconsin on a nice summer day of
mid-April. April 15th used to be the official beginning of summer [at the
place where I came from](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kolkata), and so I
packed my lightest clothes and added only one sweater for 'just in case'. My
flight was through Chicago to Madison and I heard the words 'snow in Madison'
after reaching Chicago. 'Will I be able to get out of airport in such cold
weather?' - I started to worry. The airlines quickly solved that dilamma by
putting 'flight cancelled' notice for my connection. After three hours of
frantic phone calls to my collaborator about whether to take Greyhound/rental
car or take chance on the following flight to Madison, which happened to be
the last flight, I was relieved to leave Chicago on a plane.

Next morning, the entire genome project team met in a conference room at the
University. The room was not very big, because there were only seven of us
including a graduate student, who was starting his PhD. They were all very
good biologists and experts in the organism we planned to work on, but in
terms of bioinformatics skills, the most sophisticated 'bioinformatics
program' everyone was familiar with was Excel. Also, most professors had
limited personal grants and access to their local core facilities, where they
could do small amount of sequencing.

In traditional genome projects, several biologists, who are domain experts on
an organism, meet with a number of sequencing and bioinformatics experts.
Biologists share, why the organism is interesting to biologists, and mention
anything potentially unusual about the genome (polymorphic, highly repetitive,
etc.). Based on their discussion, they jointly write a white paper and submit
it to a government grant agency. To see a good example, you may go through the
following document -

[Cephalopod genomics: A plan of strategies and organization](http://www.standa
rdsingenomics.org/index.php/sigen/article/view/sigs.3136559/811)

Our meeting was of similar nature, but right from the beginning, we understood
that we could not compete head-to-head with large genome centers solely based
assembly quality. However, it was not necessary either. We realized that the
genome was only a small piece in a large biological puzzle. If we always kept
our sight on the interesting biological properly of the organism and acquired
whatever next-gen data was needed to get as close to the truth as possible, we
could advance the field equally.

The same difference between traditional genome projects and our bootstrap
project is explained below in using 'management style' note.

**Tradition genome projects**: Organism O is biologically interesting. Having a high quality genome for it will advance the field, because many researchers will be able to do genomic experiments. Let us get the best genome for the organism at the lowest possible cost (hence NGS). 

**Bootstrapped genome project**: Organism O is biologically interesting, and we have $X of funds. Let us do the NGS experiments that will get us as close as possible to solving the biological mystery. Genome is an important piece of information, but we will combine genome, transcriptome, evolutionary biology with the sole goal of solving the puzzle. 

Sorry for being somewhat abstract in the above description. Our paper will be
submitted in a few weeks, after which I will be able to talk more clearly with
specific examples.

_To be continued._

