---
title: Theodosius Dobzhansky
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
In a previous thread, [reader Istvan Albert
mentioned](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2013/02/27/humanizing-einstein/comment-
page-1/#comment-123043) about very good genetics book by Theodosius
Dobzhansky. We did some google search on him and found a [very good
biographical memoir of him](http://www.nasonline.org/publications
/biographical-memoirs/memoir-pdfs/dobzhansky-theodosius.pdf) written by [his
student, who headed AAAS
afterward](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Francisco_J._Ayala).
<!--more-->

> Theodosius Dobzhansky was one of the most influential biologists of the
twentieth century; he also was one of the most prolific. His first publication
appeared in 1918 when Dobzhansky was eighteen years old. The complete list of
his publications comprises nearly 600 titles, including a dozen books. The
gamut of subject matter is enormous, and includes results of experimental
research in various biological disciplines, works of synthesis and theory, and
essays on humanism and philosophy, to name but three.

It is fascinating to find that Dobzhansky did everything from gene mapping to
population biology in 1920s and 30s.

>

Dobzhansky also made significant contributions to "classical" genetics,
particularly during the 1920s and 1930s. I shall mention but a few. Using
translocations between the second and third chromosomes of Drosophila
melanogaster, Dobzhansky demonstrated that the linear arrangement of genes
based on linkage relationships corresponds to a linear arrangement of genes in
chromosomes (1929). This linear correspondence had been postulated before, but
proof was first provided by Dobzhansky (and independently by Muller and
Painter in the same year). Also in 1929, Dobzhansky advanced the first
sophisticated cytological map of a chromosomechromosome III of D.
melanogaster. He showed that the relative distances between genes are
different in the linkage and in the cytological map; genes clustered around
the center of the linkage map are spread throughout a larger portion of the
cytological map. He correctly inferred that the frequency of crossing over is
not evenly distributed throughout the chromosome. Later he produced
cytological maps of the chromosomes II (1930) and X (1932) of D. melanogaster,
and propounded that the centromere (the "spindle fiber attachment" in the
terminology of the time) is a permanent feature of chromosomes. He
demonstrated that translocations decrease the frequency of crossing over and
advanced a hypothesis to account for this reduction (1931). Dobzhansky
demonstrated that the determination of femaleness by the X chromosome is not
the result of a single or a small group of genes, but to multiple factors
distributed throughout the chromosome (1931). His publications on the genetic
and environmental factors affecting sex determination started in 1928 and
continued for more than a decade.

These studies included work on bobbed mutants in the Y chromosome and their
role in male sterility (1933), as well as numerous publications
ongynandromorphs and "superfemales." His publications concerning developmental
genetics started in 1930 and continued for many years.

But, but, didn't the field of genetics start with Watson and Crick? No, it
started with [Thomas Hunt
Morgan](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomas_Hunt_Morgan). The second important
researcher was Morgan's student [Alfred
Sturtevant](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfred_Sturtevant), who constructed
the first genetic map of a chromosome in 1913. We wanted to say more about his
research, but unfortunately [the seminal paper is still not openly accessible
after 100
years](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jez.1400140104/abstract) !!

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/Capture-
300x74.png)

