---
title: Henry Bourne's Five Axioms for Mediocracy and Disaster
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Any scientist, who acknowledges that an economic depression started in 2008
and is still not unfinished, is definitely worth reading. In [a thought-
provoking article](http://elife.elifesciences.org/content/2/e01138), UCSF
professor Henry Bourne presents five steps, through which the depression can
be turned into a bigger disaster.
<!--more-->

Axiom 1. We must support big science, or in his word - **"bigger is always
better"**

Axiom 2. You are right, but the system is too hard to change - **"top-down
always wins"**

Axiom 3. Private philanthropists want to see their names on the building, or
otherwise they will not give us money - **"the philanthropist is always
right"**

Axiom 4. **"only active researchers can teach science to medical students"**

Axiom 5. Hire more post-docs - **"trainees equal laboratory workforce"**

You can read the details [in his
article](http://elife.elifesciences.org/content/2/e01138), and they rhyme well
with our forecasts of what is going to happen.

[Top N Reasons NOT to do a Ph.D. in Bioinformatics/Computational
Biology](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/08/11/top-n-reasons-not-to-do-a-ph-d
-in-bioinformaticscomputational-biology/)

[Our Vision for Biology of 21st
Century](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/08/16/our-vision-for-biology-during-
21st-century/)

[A Chart to Back our Forecast for 21st
Century](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/08/21/a-chart-to-back-our-forecast-
for-21st-century/)

\-------------------------------------------------------------------

Wise people are hard to come by and less so in the academia. So, we must agree
with the person in this webpage - [Henry Bourne, you
rock](http://cmp.ucsf.edu/index.php/faculty/2-cmpfaculty/1-hboune) !!

![](http://cmp.ucsf.edu/images/cmp_slideshow/ron_lasker_sm.jpg)

\-------------------------------------------------------------------

Edit.

Readers are encouraged to read Henry Bourne's previous articles - [The Writing
on the Wall](http://elife.elifesciences.org/content/2/e00642?ijkey=ec1e9e1e107
1c62743704b339b2c6ec609633409&keytype2=tf_ipsecsha)

[The postdoc holding tank (TRR-VI) - Uncovering the biggest bulge under that
rug](http://biomedwatch.wordpress.com/2012/08/30/the-postdoc-holding-tank-trr-
vi/)

They are very thought-provoking in highlighting the problems. However, the
solution to central-planning cannot be more central-planning, unlike what Dr.
Bourne suggested.

Maybe he needs to read couple of our old commentaries -

[Government is the Mother of All
Invention](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/06/15/government-is-the-
mother-of-all-invention/)

[DORA Pledge YASI from Government-funded
Scientists](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/06/12/dora-pledge-yasi-from-
government-funded-scientists/)

Why won't Dr. Bourne's suggestions work? It is because central planning,
unless stopped at an early stage, leads to bankruptcy (the 'writing on the
wall'). People supported by central planning are always slow to adapt, and
that is a feature not bug.

[Spain's Research Council Approaches
Bankruptcy](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/341/6143/225.short)

> The Spanish National Research Council, Spain's flagship research agency, has
run massive deficits for several years. If the governmentwhich has made
drastic cuts in research funding the past few yearsdoesn't pick up the tab, it
may go into bankruptcy before the year is over.

