---
title: Journal that Sells by Hype Tells Scientists not to Hype their Work
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Oh the hilarity !!!! Nature journal, which got famous last year by hyping
ENCODE author Ewan Birney's claim of rewriting text-books, advises scientists
not to hype their work !! Promoting your work 'a little bit' is ok however.
<!--more-->

To be fair to the journal, the advise comes from a young graduate student
Monika Maleszewska, who is yet to connect all dots of modern science.

>

In the competitive and expensive world of modern science, researchers cannot
afford to toil away on their own. Lone-wolf scientists might have their own
vision of innovative, cutting-edge research that will reap rewards. But they
will probably struggle to procure enough funding to do that work. A hybrid
approach might be to secure money through grant applications for 'fashionable'
work (with a pinch of hype where necessary), and to hope that the resulting
funding will, somewhere along the way, let the visionary scientist pursue his
or her dream project the one that really has an impact.

..............

I often wish that scientists had the luxury of being able to do basic research
just because it is interesting. But reviewers sometimes gravitate towards the
projects that provide direct solutions to burning problems, rather than to
basic projects with no clear applications. We must give basic projects a
chance, especially because breakthroughs are hard to anticipate. That basic
science might be closer to a meaningful application than anyone expects.

In the competitive world of scientific funding, researchers often have no
choice but to hone their political skills and manage public relations for
their research. Ideally, they will be able to do this without taking too much
time away from the science. What's clear is that budding researchers must
learn how to promote their work, and perhaps even become trendsetters without
resorting to hype.

As we have shown in our column again and again, there is absolutely no
competition for real science, as defined by searching for truth in nature. For
the most recent example, please take a look at [various articles by Ken Weiss
written over the last 10 years](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/07/30
/battle-over-gwas-ken-weiss-edition/). The man had been right about #GWAS for
the entire time (hence a good scientist) but nobody paid attention, because
following his prescription did not win government grants. Hyping scientific
results is a pre-condition for getting large government money to run
scientific projects. If you are seeking money from governments and especially
democratic governments relying on public opinion, you must hype your work, or
you will [lose against John Stamatoyannopoulos and
alike](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/07/29/uw-alumni-early-
achievement-award-2013-dr-john-stamatoyannopoulos/) !!

On the topic of damage wrought by ENCODE hype in popular media, these kinds of
articles have become commonplace in news these days (h/t: @DanGraur). Add that
to the fact the 75% of Americans already believe in intelligent design, and
you see where it is going.

[Best Science Argues for a Creator, Former Geophysicist
Says](http://www.christianpost.com/news/best-science-argues-for-a-creator-
former-geophysicist-says-101215/)

> Theories of evolution, Darwinian and otherwise, fail to explain the
development of animal life, and intelligent design explains it better, argues
former geophysicist Stephen C. Meyer in his recently released New York Times
best-selling book, Darwin's Doubt: The Explosive Origin of Animal Life and the
Case for Intelligent Design

"The best scientific evidence undermines Darwinism, and the more current form
of Darwinism known as neo-darwinism," Meyer, a former oil industry
geophysicist who holds a Ph.D. in the philosophy of science from the
University of Cambridge and directs the Center for Science and Culture at the
Discovery Institute in Seattle, Wash., said in a Tuesday interview with The
Christian Post.

"The burden of proof that I proudly bear in the book is to show that the best
scientific evidence now challenges the theory" of evolution, the author
explained.

........

Theories also make predictions as to what scientists should find in future
discoveries. Meyer said he laid out ten such predictions that intelligent
design makes, as opposed to those Darwinism would suggest.

**One prediction of Darwinism, the "junk DNA," he claims has already proven false. Proponents of evolution argued segments of DNA which do not code a specific protein are "leftovers of trial and error." Intelligent design theorists, on the other hand, expected most DNA to have a function. "The Encode project that was published last Fall," Meyer explained, "shows that the junk DNA isn't junk at all."**

Both of the theories prove a bit more than scientific, the author added. Both
Darwinism and intelligent design "are based on scientific evidence, they use
the same type of method to cover their conclusions, and they both have larger
metaphysical implications."

