---
title: Carnivorous Bladderwort Plant Genome Shows Some Designers are More Intelligent
  than Others
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
[Title borrowed from a tweet of Dan Graur]
<!--more-->

When we argue against functionality of junk DNA, many others say that it is
impossible to say so until someone deletes all junk DNA in a small baby and
shows that he lives till old age. Nature (not the journal) may have done such
an experiment in a different organism and [Nature journal published the report
](http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/nature12132.html)
despite [telling us two weeks back that junk DNA was not understood](http://ww
w.nature.com/nature/journal/v496/n7446/full/496419a.html). We wish other
pressing problems of the world get solved so quickly.

The bladderwort genome is amazing in many respects. 82 Mb is rather tiny
compared to [22 Gb conifer genome](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2013/05/11
/steven-salzberg-at-bog13-assembling-22gb-conifer-genome/) and even larger
lily genome. Quite surprisingly, the genome went through three rounds of whole
genome duplication since diverging from common ancestry with tomato and grape.
Still it has only 2% of junk dna, or essentially every piece of DNA that could
be removed was removed.

[Architecture and evolution of a minute plant genome](http://www.nature.com/na
ture/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/nature12132.html) h/t: angry ?@DanGraur

> It has been argued that the evolution of plant genome size is principally
unidirectional and increasing owing to the varied action of whole-genome
duplications (WGDs) and mobile element proliferation1. However, extreme genome
size reductions have been reported in the angiosperm family tree. Here we
report the sequence of the 82-megabase genome of the carnivorous bladderwort
plant Utricularia gibba. Despite its tiny size, the U. gibba genome
accommodates a typical number of genes for a plant, with the main difference
from other plant genomes arising from a drastic reduction in non-genic DNA.
Unexpectedly, we identified at least three rounds of WGD in U. gibba since
common ancestry with tomato (Solanum) and grape (Vitis). The compressed
architecture of the U. gibba genome indicates that a small fraction of
intergenic DNA, with few or no active retrotransposons, is sufficient to
regulate and integrate all the processes required for the development and
reproduction of a complex organism.

There are several possible explanations for the above observations.

A. The intelligent designer working on bladderwort plant genome had more
government funding than the one working on human genome.

Or,

B. If one and only one intelligent designer worked on both genomes, maybe he
packed more DNA in human genome because humans are more complex creatures, and
even more DNA in conifer genome, because pine trees are far more complex than
humans.

Or (we do not want to utter this third possibility)

C. Nature (journal) needs to borrow the magic enzyme from bladderwort to
remove a set of junk papers, who claimed to have rewritten biology textbooks.

We do not want to entertain the third possibility, because ENCODE is too big
to fail (pub intended).

