---
title: Global Warming and Other Superstitions
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Bob Hoye, who also [publishes superb economic
commentaries](http://www.safehaven.com/author/32/bob-hoye), wrote an
[excellent article on global warming](http://www.safehaven.com/article/28862
/global-warming-and-other-superstitions). We noticed that almost all of our
favorite contrarian economic commentators called global warming for what it
is, a giant scam.
<!--more-->

Acting man:

[Global Warming Becomes Inclement Weather](http://www.acting-man.com/?p=21335)

[Climate Change is Back on the Agenda](http://www.acting-man.com/?p=20442)

Mish:

[New NASA Data Blow Gaping Hole In Global Warming Alarmism; Idiocies of Cap-
and-Trade Exposed](http://globaleconomicanalysis.blogspot.com/2011/07/new-
nasa-data-blow-gaping-hole-in.html)

[The Global Warming Religion - A Modern Day Crusade: Do You select The Cause
or Does the Cause Select
You?](http://globaleconomicanalysis.blogspot.com/2009/11/global-warming-
religion-modern-day.html)

whereas most government-backed 'scientists' we follow seem to 'believe' in
global warming.

Michael Eisen:

[Do You Believe in Human Genome, Quantum Mechanics or Lie
Algebra?](http://homolog.us/Social/do-you-believe-in-human-genome-quantum-
mechanics-or-lie-algebra/)

We explained why it is so [in an earlier
commentary](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2012/07/28/on-global-warming/). The
alarming forecasts of global warming are based on an economic model, which the
'scientists' refuse to investigate. Yet, when they write grants, they are no
less shy to wear global warming hat to justify their projects.

[Many readers objected](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/2013/02/06/shaking-up-
science/), when we talked about decay of scientific culture in USA, even
though we did not make our comment lightly. Readers commented that learning
about banking or economic models are not relevant for bioinformaticians, but
what if your metagenomics project is funded to look at global warming? The
drive to produce more and more specialists is a sign of terminal phase, as we
discussed [in a different commentary on Dimitry Orlov's
book](http://homolog.us/Social/problem-of-excessive-scale/).

>

Ironically, Kohrs effort failed precisely because of the vast scale of the
contemporary intellectual endeavor. Kohr pointed out that most of the great
advances in learning and the arts occurred in small communities in ancient
Greece, medieval Europe and other places where everyone knew everyone, where
the entire sweep of human affairs could be taken in at a glance and where one
could be well regarded as what was once called a Renaissance Man a generalist.
But the vast scale at which contemporary society operates makes it impossible
for anyone to observe the whole of it with any degree or precision or insight,
forcing everyone to specialize in one thing or another; the vaster the scale,
the more circumscribed the realm in which one can gain sufficient expertise to
understand what is happening and be in a position to predict what might happen
next. The proliferation of experts who know almost everything about almost
nothing is a sure sign that the pursuit of knowledge has been carried to an
excessive scale, but the existence of these same experts makes it impossible
to claw knowledge back from the brink of utter irrelevance, because that can
only done by a generalist. In turn, generalists are not allowed among
specialists: to a specialist, as Kohr pointed out, a generalist is either
irrelevant (unable to advance knowledge in the specialists narrow field of
expertise) or an impostor (someone not even interested in advancing knowledge
in the specialists narrow field of expertise).

We will get back to the above concepts in a follow up commentary we are
preparing on personal genomics. The 'personal genomics revolution' is
following a course that is intellectually challenging for scientists, but
could be ultimately useless for the society. The real revolution will likely
follow a different course altogether.

