---
title: A Series of Good Ideas
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
In the 'beginning', Universities had strict rules to make sure [their funding
sources could not dictate faculty decisions](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tenu
re_\(academic\)#From_1900_to_1940). That was the origin of tenure system.
<!--more-->

Then came a series of good ideas.

US government decided to impose a ['victory tax' on
people](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Revenue_Act_of_1942). It was a **good
idea**, because Nazis were very bad, the tax was only temporary ('one time')
and, to sweeten the deal, government [promised to refund the
money](http://www.constitution.org/tax/us-ic/hist/victorytax.htm) after war.
Wow, who does not want to pay for 'victory'???!!

\-----------------------------------------------------

Government repealed victory tax in due time, but [imposed another tax
levy](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Individual_Income_Tax_Act_of_1944) of
equivalent amount. This time the tax was permanent. Still it appeared like a
**good idea**, because permanent military needed permanent funding.

\-----------------------------------------------------

Dropping atom bombs on Japan ended WWII and it seemed like a **good idea** to
use part of military money to pay physicists for nuclear research. After all,
without their help, the war would not have ended.

\-----------------------------------------------------

Physicists did not want to live like prisoners in military barracks of Los
Alamos, and went back to their universities. It seemed like a **good idea** to
fund their nuclear research at the universities.

\-----------------------------------------------------

If nuclear physicists were good scientists paid by the government, why not
other physicists, chemists, engineers and many others? It seemed like a **good
idea** to have government-funded research grants for other scientists. [NSF
was born](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Science_Foundation#History_and
_mission). (Note the catch word below - 'national defense').

> The NSF was established by the National Science Foundation Act of 1950. Its
stated mission is "To promote the progress of science; to advance the national
health, prosperity, and welfare; and to secure the national defense."

\-----------------------------------------------------

Russians sent a person in space, starting ['space
race'](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Space_Race). It seemed like a **good
idea** to join the race, because what if those 'bad boys' won it due to lack
of competition? [NASA was born](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NASA).

\-----------------------------------------------------

By the time, space race (part of cold-war) ended, government figured out that
scientists got adrenalin rush through 'mini-war-like' situations and people
were more willing to pay for wars. Declaring ['war on
cancer'](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/War_on_Cancer) seemed like a **good
idea**. After all, who did not want cancer to be eradicated by 1975? [National
Cancer Institute](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Cancer_Institute) was
born. (In the following speech, note two things -(i) reference to world war to
motivate the new 'conquest', (ii) government was only 16% of economy.).

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/qX8d1vOI8l8" frameborder="0"> </iframe>

\-----------------------------------------------------

By this time, government became the biggest game in academic town, and many
scientists wanted to get money from the new Santa. However, this new Santa was
so centralized that researchers could not simply knock on its door and give
their wish list. Centralized procedures had to be created.

One of those centralized procedure was to give grants according to the
performances of the researchers. Scientists wrote papers. So, it seemed like a
**good idea** to measure that performance based on the number of papers.

\-----------------------------------------------------

That created a problem, because the high-quality papers of some scientists got
as many brownie points as someone else's low quality papers. Centralized body
did not understand 'quality' and needed more concrete procedures. Using
[impact factor](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Impact_factor) seemed like a
**good idea**.

> Impact factors are calculated yearly starting from 1975 for those journals
that are indexed in the Journal Citation Reports.

\------------------------------------------------------

The inventor of 'impact factor' made an unexpected high-impact discovery. He
found that Science and Nature were at the core for all of hard science, core
defined by his measure called impact factor.

> The creation of the Science Citation Index made it possible to calculate
impact factor, which measures the importance of scientific journals. It led to
the unexpected discovery that a few journals like Nature and Science were core
for all of hard science. The same pattern does not happen with the humanities
or the social sciences.

It seemed like a **good idea** to ignore all those chit-chat about impact
factor and simply give grants to those, who published in Science and Nature.
Cell journal was born in 1974 and did not count in his calculation.

\-------------------------------------------------------------

By this time, US society changed quite a bit. Women got liberated and blacks
got 'desegregated'. If you go to wealthy California towns like Beverly Hills,
Woodside or Atherton today, you find a large black population, unlike prior to
1960s, when the society was segregated.

Therefore it seemed like a **good idea** to make science grants serve all
kinds of social purposes - commitment to teaching, 'equal opportunity',
community service, etc. With centralized donor, it was fairly easy to change
the rules and pass the paper-work to hapless grant-writers.

\-------------------------------------------------------------

Universities realized that Federal and legal paper-work were taking a lot of
time for the researchers. It seemed like a **good idea** to establish a
separate grants management department and take a cut from each science
project. Institutional overhead was born. Professors were happy to be shielded
from learning about constant changes in law.

\-------------------------------------------------------------

Apart from war, a race was another thing people loved. An 'international
cancer race' led to finding of two genes (BRCA1 and BRCA2) associated with
breast cancer in a small group of people. The book ["Breakthrough: The Race to
Find the Breast Cancer Gene"](http://www.amazon.com/Breakthrough-Race-Find-
Breast-Cancer/dp/0471120251) was read by every Tom, Dick and Harry, thus
bringing genetics to home. Around the same time, another group of scientists
(Lap-Chee Tsui, Francis Collins,J. R. Riordan) discovered the gene related to
cystic fibrosis.

Among all those scientists involved, Francis Collins was the one presenting
the most positive vision with very specific timelines. So, it seemed like a
**good idea** to give him the most money and responsibility. [From his 1999
paper](http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJM199907013410106) \-

>

**A HYPOTHETICAL CASE IN 2010**

General visions of gene-based medicine in the future are useful, but many
health care providers are probably still puzzled by how it will affect the
daily practice of medicine in a primary care setting. A hypothetical clinical
encounter in 2010 is described here.

John, a 23-year-old college graduate, is referred to his physician because a
serum cholesterol level of 255 mg per deciliter was detected in the course of
a medical examination required for employment. He is in good health but has
smoked one pack of cigarettes per day for six years. Aided by an interactive
computer program that takes John's family history, his physician notes that
there is a strong paternal history of myocardial infarction and that John's
father died at the age of 48 years.

To obtain more precise information about his risks of contracting coronary
artery disease and other illnesses in the future, John agrees to consider a
battery of genetic tests that are available in 2010. After working through an
interactive computer program that explains the benefits and risks of such
tests, John agrees (and signs informed consent) to undergo 15 genetic tests
that provide risk information for illnesses for which preventive strategies
are available. He decides against an additional 10 tests involving disorders
for which no clinically validated preventive interventions are yet available.

John's subsequent counseling session with the physician and a genetic nurse
specialist focuses on the conditions for which his risk differs substantially
(by a factor of more than two) from that of the general population. Like most
patients, John is interested in both his relative risk and his absolute risk.

John is pleased to learn that genetic testing does not always give bad news
his risks of contracting prostate cancer and Alzheimer's disease are reduced,
because he carries low-risk variants of the several genes known in 2010 to
contribute to these illnesses. But John is sobered by the evidence of his
increased risks of contracting coronary artery disease, colon cancer, and lung
cancer. Confronted with the reality of his own genetic data, he arrives at
that crucial teachable moment when a lifelong change in health-related
behavior, focused on reducing specific risks, is possible. And there is much
to offer. By 2010, the field of pharmacogenomics has blossomed, and a
prophylactic drug regimen based on the knowledge of John's personal genetic
data can be precisely prescribed to reduce his cholesterol level and the risk
of coronary artery disease to normal levels. His risk of colon cancer can be
addressed by beginning a program of annual colonoscopy at the age of 45, which
in his situation is a very cost-effective way to avoid colon cancer. His
substantial risk of contracting lung cancer provides the key motivation for
him to join a support group of persons at genetically high risk for serious
complications of smoking, and he successfully kicks the habit.

Please note that - (i) 23andMe was scolded by FDA for doing the exact same
thing that he predicted would happen by 2010, that too without incorporating
the benefits of improvement in sequencing technology, (ii) John cannot even
get a functional healthcare website from the government in 2013.

\-------------------------------------------------------------

Human genome was sequenced by a private company in 2000, and it seemed like a
**good idea** to double the budget of NIH to help discover medicines.

\-------------------------------------------------------------

USA was bankrupted by its banking industry in 2008, and it seemed like a
**good idea** to 'stimulate' the scientists further with more borrowed
research money.

\-------------------------------------------------------------

At the end, we have an academic system and 'tenured professors' at the beck
and call of those providing money for research, namely the people and the
government. That was not the original design.

In this context, the proposal of Schekman (the editor of HHMI-sponsored ELife)
of not using Science/Nature/Cell seems like moving from one funding source
partly controlling science to another funding source fully controlling
science, [as someone commented
elsewhere](http://retractionwatch.com/2013/12/11/cell-nature-science-boycott-
what-was-randy-schekmans-tenure-at-pnas-like/#comment-70109) \-

> I am curious about the consequences of having luxury funding agencies like
the HHMI and Welcome trust in charge of a journal. Have the funders run a
journal seems to present a conflict of interest. Will the editors of Elife be
under any pressure to review HHMI funded research? Or will they refuse to
consider research that contradicts a member of their prestigious body? Will
people without HHMI funding feel under pressure to publish in Elife to help
get HHMI funding?

