---
title: Citing BioStar and SeqAnswers Papers Does not Make Sense
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
This odd Twitter request is a good example of how 40 years of government
funding destroyed 400 years of scientific traditions.
<!--more-->

![Capture2](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/05/Capture25-300x48.png)

Historically, the practice of citation was followed by scholars so that
intellectual contributions of other scholars were proper credited. Plagiarism
meant not giving proper credit to other scholars for their intellectual work.
For example, [Newton accused Leibniz of plagiarism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wi
ki/Leibniz%E2%80%93Newton_calculus_controversy), because he thought Leibniz's
theory of calculus was inspired by his own.

> The last years of Leibniz's life, 17091716, were embittered by a long
controversy with John Keill, Newton, and others, over whether Leibniz had
discovered calculus independently of Newton, or whether he had merely invented
another notation for ideas that were fundamentally Newton's. Newton
manipulated the quarrel. The most remarkable aspect of this barren struggle
was that no participant doubted for a moment that Newton had already developed
his method of fluxions when Leibniz began working on the differential
calculus. Yet there was seemingly no proof beyond Newton's word. He had
published a calculation of a tangent with the note: "This is only a special
case of a general method whereby I can calculate curves and determine maxima,
minima, and centers of gravity." How this was done he explained to a pupil a
full 20 years later, when Leibniz's articles were already well-read. Newton's
manuscripts came to light only after his death.

Ever since academics sold their journals to commercial entities, plagiarism
became synonymous to copyright violation and citation turned into a method to
make claims for government funding. We can give three good examples, where US
National Academy members or alike knowingly plagiarized our prior work to
rewrite history.

BioStar and SeqAnswers are very helpful tools, but they are communication
media to bring people together. Is it appropriate to cite BioStar or
SeqAnswers papers merely because of their utility? We see three problems.

A. Should a researcher cite his colleague instead of Einstein for theory of
relativity, because his colleague explained the theory to him in simple
language?

B. Should a student cite the charter of his university or an academic
conference for theory of relativity, because those two venues helped him meet
smart people and bridge gaps in his understanding?

C. Should we cite Google hangout for coelacanth paper and ftp program for
being able to download human genome?

We presume the primary motivation for getting the BioStar and SeqAnswers
papers cited is to allow them to get government funding. Given how useful
those online tools are, biologists and bioinformaticians have a golden
opportunity to ask government bureaucrats so that funding rules are brought to
the internet age.

\-------------------

Edit.

Needless to say, others disagree.

![Capture3](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/05/Capture36-300x74.png)

![Capture2](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/05/Capture28-300x64.png)

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/05/Capture29-300x149.png)

