---
title: Inserting XIST ncRNA on Human Chromosome 21
categories:
- ncRNA
---
It is nice to find researchers getting interested in long non-coding RNAs and
journals acknowledging their existence. When we submitted [our HRA1
paper](http://www.yeastgenome.org/cgi-bin/locusHistory.pl?locus=HRA1) to one
of those 'high-profile' journals, the editor rejected it because we did not
analyze a microRNA (the hottest thing in 2006).
<!--more-->

[Here](http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/nature12394.htm
l) is an interesting XIST paper that appeared in Nature today.

> Downs syndrome is a common disorder with enormous medical and social costs,
caused by trisomy for chromosome 21. We tested the concept that gene imbalance
across an extra chromosome can be de facto corrected by manipulating a single
gene, XIST (the X-inactivation gene). Using genome editing with zinc finger
nucleases, we inserted a large, inducible XIST transgene into the DYRK1A locus
on chromosome 21, in Downs syndrome pluripotent stem cells. The XIST non-
coding RNA coats chromosome 21 and triggers stable heterochromatin
modifications, chromosome-wide transcriptional silencing and DNA methylation
to form a chromosome 21 Barr body. This provides a model to study human
chromosome inactivation and creates a system to investigate genomic expression
changes and cellular pathologies of trisomy 21, free from genetic and
epigenetic noise. Notably, deficits in proliferation and neural rosette
formation are rapidly reversed upon silencing one chromosome 21. Successful
trisomy silencing in vitro also surmounts the major first step towards
potential development of chromosome therapy.

