---
title: Long-term Criminal Fraud at Indian Drug-maker Ranbaxy
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Forbes published a [detailed
account](http://features.blogs.fortune.cnn.com/2013/05/15/ranbaxy-fraud-
lipitor/) of long-term fraud at Indian drug company Ranbaxy.
<!--more-->

>

Lying to regulators and backdating and forgery were commonplace, he says. The
company even forged its own standard operating procedures, which FDA
inspectors rely on to assess whether a company is following its own policies.
Thakur's team was told of one instance in which company officials forged and
backdated a standard operating procedure related to how patient data are
stored, then aged the document in a "steam room" overnight to fool regulators.

Company scientists told Thakur's staff that they were directed to substitute
cheaper, lower-quality ingredients in place of better ingredients, to
manipulate test parameters to accommodate higher impurities, and even to
substitute brand-name drugs in lieu of their own generics in bioequivalence
tests to produce better results.

And later in the text -

> Thakur knew the drugs weren't good. They had high impurities, degraded
easily, and would be useless at best in hot, humid conditions. They would be
taken by the world's poorest patients in sub-Saharan Africa, who had almost no
medical infrastructure and no recourse for complaints. The injustice made him
livid.

Ranbaxy executives didn't care, says Kathy Spreen, and made little effort to
conceal it. In a conference call with a dozen company executives, one brushed
aside her fears about the quality of the AIDS medicine Ranbaxy was supplying
for Africa. "Who cares?" he said, according to Spreen. "It's just blacks
dying."

Despite conducting such systemic fraud -

i) Company is still in business,

ii) Nobody was sent to jail,

iii) US media did not go into overdrive to highlight such systemic fraud at
India's largest drug-maker unlike they did with unknown toy-makers in China.

