---
title: Shocking Finding that a Genome by Itself Provides Little Insight
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Remember the [bootstrapped genome
project](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/03/04/sequester-special-a
-bootstrapped-genome-project-i/)? We are at that stage, where we have a
readable paper, but the only name my colleagues agreed upon is 'X genome
provides insights on ...'.
<!--more-->

Here is what bothers me about the title. We do provide quite a bit of insight
into the biological system we are working on. In fact, I have not seen any
other genome paper contributing to the biology of respective organism by the
same amount at the 'genome paper' stage. In that sense, 'provides insight' is
not a false claim and that is the good news.

Bad news is that if I exclude all comparative transcriptomics data from the
paper and try to write it based on the genome, the appropriate title would be
"Shocking Finding that a Genome by Itself Provides Little Insight about
Functionality".

Apart from that, you know that the meme 'X genome provides insights on
evolution of Y' has become a cliche, when even intelligent designers use it in
the blessed contributions (check the last insightful link below).

\---------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Investigating the Human Genome: Insights into Human Variation and Disease
Susceptibility](http://www.amazon.com/Investigating-Human-Genome-Variation-
Susceptibility/dp/0132168146)

[The Medicago genome provides insight into the evolution of rhizobial symbiose
s](http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v480/n7378/full/nature10625.html)

[The African coelacanth genome provides insights into tetrapod evolution](http
://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v496/n7445/full/nature12027.html)

[Sequencing of the sea lamprey (Petromyzon marinus) genome provides insights
into vertebrate
evolution](http://www.nature.com/ng/journal/v45/n4/full/ng.2568.html)

[Comparative genome and phenotypic analysis of Clostridium difficile 027
strains provides insight into the evolution of a hypervirulent
bacterium](http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/pdf/gb-2009-10-9-r102.pdf)

[Analyses of pig genomes provide insight into porcine demography and evolution
](http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v491/n7424/full/nature11622.html)

[Multiple Single-Cell Genomes Provide Insight into Functions of Uncultured
Deltaproteobacteria in the Human Oral Cavity](http://www.plosone.org/article/i
nfo%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0059361)

[Whole Genome Analysis of Leptospira licerasiae Provides Insight into
Leptospiral Evolution and Pathogenicity](http://www.plosntds.org/article/info%
3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pntd.0001853)

[Genome sequence of an Australian kangaroo, Macropus eugenii, provides insight
into the evolution of mammalian reproduction and
development](http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/8/r81)

[Genome of primitive-looking fish yields insight into
evolution](http://www.boston.com/news/science/blogs/science-in-mind/2013/04/25
/genome-primitive-looking-fish-yields-insight-into-
evolution/nCT4GwcOkGniEf0QxVKtiN/blog.html)

[Genome sequencing provides unprecedented insight into causes of pneumococcal
disease](http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/news/press-releases/genome-sequencing-
provides-unprecedented-insight-into-causes-of-pneumococcal-disease/)

[Pear genome provides new insight into breeding improvement and evolutionary
trace analysis](http://www.nanowerk.com/news2/biotech/newsid=27525.php)

[Maps of miscanthus genome offer insight into grass evolution](http://news.ill
inois.edu/news/12/0515miscanthusmap_StephenMoose.html)

[Comparative Analysis of Bat Genomes Provides Insight into the Evolution of
Flight and Immunity

[First Whole Bat Genome Sequencing Gives Insight Into Flight,
Immunity](http://www.newswise.com/articles/view/597385/?sc=c106)

[Genome Sequence of Azospirillum brasilense CBG497 and Comparative Analyses of
Azospirillum Core and Accessory Genomes provide Insight into Niche
Adaptation](http://www.mdpi.com/2073-4425/3/4/576)

[Insight for humans from horse genome sequence

[Genome characterisation of the genus Francisella reveals insight into similar
evolutionary paths in pathogens of mammals and
fish](http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/13/268)

[Turtle Genome, Insight into More Evolution
Problems](http://www.darwinthenandnow.com/2013/05/turtle-genome-insight-into-
more-evolution-problems/)

\-----------------------

New addition (Sept 1, 2013)

Nature: [Genomes reveal roots of TB drug
resistance](http://www.nature.com/news/genomes-reveal-roots-of-tb-drug-
resistance-1.13645)

\-----------------------

Dec 2014

T. Ryan Gregory assembled a much larger list of 'insightful' genome papers.

[Clearly, the purpose of genome sequencing is to provide
insights.](http://www.genomicron.evolverzone.com/2014/12/clearly-the-purpose-
of-genome-sequencing-is-to-provide-insights/?utm_source=twitterfeed&utm_medium
=twitter&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+Genomicron+%28Genomicron%29)

