---
title: No WWIII !! We are Back
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Dear Readers, We have been hiding in our bunkers fearing the worst, when
someone forwarded us [a NY Times op-
ed](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/09/12/opinion/putin-plea-for-caution-from-
russia-on-syria.html?src=me&ref=general&_r=0). Then we received another
forwarding of the same article, and another. Lo and behold, the article is
going strong as the most emailed one from NY Times three days in a row,
surpassing hot scientific discoveries such as 'Middle-Aged Men, Too, Can Blame
Estrogen for That Waistline' !
<!--more-->

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/09/Capture5-234x300.png)

Few weeks back, when we wrote the following commentary, several readers
complained to us privately or in comment section about being wrong on Russia:

[Russia Best Assembler, Best French Actor and now Freest Country
!!](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/08/02/russians-not-only-they-have-
the-best-assembler-and-rosalind-but-now-they-got-a-courageous-american/)

Although at first we felt tempted to restart those arguments based on the new
evidences, after some thought we decided to declare peace with those readers.

The developments of the last few days led to many humorous occasions. Let us
cover those in the rest of the commentary before getting to more interesting
topics in the following posts.

**A Really Cool Kickstarter project !**

Kickstarter has been paying for small and large technology development
projects, and some scientists argued it could be a good alternative to writing
government grants. However, they may face intense competition from projects
like the following:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/z-sdO6pwVHQ" frameborder="0"> </iframe>

**A Replacement President**

It explains why Russian president writes NY Times article, but US president
goes to Jay Leno show.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/O0azojPPRhw" frameborder="0"> </iframe>

**A Cartoon**

More informative about funding than [guitar playing of Dr. Francis
Collins](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/09/04/stephen-w-scherer/).

![September 7, 2013](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2013/09
/20130907_shame-300x242.jpg)

**Protest Against NSA**

Brazilian hackers are angry no doubt, but they confused the four-letter agency
with the three-letter agency.

![nasa-domains-hacked-BMPoC-against-nsa-spying-syrian-war-
1024x507](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/nasa-domains-
hacked-BMPoC-against-nsa-spying-syrian-war-1024x507-300x148.png)

**First time in its 139 year history that Nature Makes an Endorsement for Political Post**

Old, but really funny !!

[Link](http://www.nature.com/news/a-vote-for-science-1.11634)

