---
title: Good Riddance - "Death of the Genome Paper"
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
David Roy Smith [wrote about how genome papers are not fashionable any more](h
ttp://www.frontiersin.org/Plant_Genetics_and_Genomics/10.3389/fgene.2013.00072
/full). Good riddance. Too much focus on 'genome papers' by big journals
distorted the scientific publishing landscape over the last decade. We will
provide a good example based on Dr. Smith's [favorite genome
paper](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/318/5848/245.full).
<!--more-->

> Many of my favorite journal articles are genome papers. I remember, when I
was a grad student in phycology, eagerly awaiting publication of the genome
for Chlamydomonasthe superstar of green algaeand reading it incessantly once
it was released, gleaning new insights each time through. There is something
intimate and personal in learning about a species' genome. And similarly, if
you are part of the team describing the genome, there is a feeling that you're
giving the readers a first glimpse at an uncharted territory, with its unique
landscape of genes, introns and intergenic regions.

If you check the Chlamy genome paper, you will find that it spent about 1/3rd
of space describing flagellar genes. Three years prior to its publication, we
[submitted a paper identifying similar set of flagellar
genes](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15738400) but in a more direct way.
Instead of doing a genome comparison, we did a transcriptome measurement and
got them. What a novel concept!! However, Science editors were not impressed,
because we did not submit a 'genome paper'.

Three years later, they published a 'genome paper' with similar set of
findings. Flagellar gene section was one of the two biological stories of the
genome paper, other one being genes related to photosynthesis. So, essentially
we stole half of genome paper's thunder three years before, and we published a
real measurement instead of genome comparison. Of course, Science editors and
Arthur Grossman & Company devised an elegant way to deal with that
shortcoming. They decided to publish the chlamy Science paper without citing
our work !!

Ladies and Gentlemen, that is how science moves 'forward' in U S of A.

