---
title: All About Federal Funding for Research
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
A collaborator informed us that their university has a new requirement for PhD
students in biology. Any student taking preliminary exam needs to write a full
Federal-style grant proposal and submit it to the committee. We think that is
a thoughtful move, but eventually the university should include two other
topics in their curricula to raise well-balanced students -
<!--more-->

(i) Ability to ENCODE papers (i.e. make inflated claims) to get into 'high-
profile' commercial journals,

(ii) For those who fail to ENCODE papers, training to fill up other Federal
welfare forms akin to grant applications (e.g. check ["The Ph.D. Now Comes
With Food Stamps"](https://chronicle.com/article/From-Graduate-School-
to/131795/)).

We will restrict this discussion to federal grants only, and devote an entire
commentary on this topic with renewed interest among students.

**Who provides federal funding?**

Most graduate students get out of universities thinking that the government
grants come from agencies with 3 or 4 letter acronyms. That is true, but the
four-letter agency is different from what they learn. The actual funding comes
from a different 'agency', which also has a four letter name - 'HOST'. Please
note that HOST is not an acronym. In popular vernacular, HOST is also
described as 'ordinary Americans', but we prefer to use scientific term.

The words host and parasite usually have bad connotation, but that is not
always true in the living world. Sometimes, parasites provide useful services
to the host and the relationship is called
[symbiosis](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Symbiosis). A good example is shown
below.

![](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/70/Common_clownfish_
curves_dnsmpl.jpg/250px-Common_clownfish_curves_dnsmpl.jpg)

_In a symbiotic mutualistic relationship, the clownfish feeds on small
invertebrates that otherwise have potential to harm the sea anemone, and the
fecal matter from the clownfish provides nutrients to the sea anemone. The
clownfish is additionally protected from predators by the anemone's stinging
cells, to which the clownfish is immune._

**Symbiosis or no symbiosis in federal funding?**

Knowledgeable readers may point out that if there is symbiosis (i.e. mutual
benefit), we should not use the words 'host' and 'parasites'. Well, that would
have been true under normal circumstances, but here is the problem. [The HOST
died in 2007-2008](http://jessescrossroadscafe.blogspot.com/2013/06/us-
civilian-employment-to-population.html), as you can clearly see from the
following figures. We have a number of similar charts and they all point to
the same thing - the HOST is dead.

![](http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-WHRa2JK4kNM/Ub-
qp25ypcI/AAAAAAAAqRs/R7giAdvMnzM/s640/civilpopulation.png)

We do not believe symbiosis is possible on dead hosts. Some others recognized
the same problem and are making a desperate attempt to resuscitate the HOST.
That is being done by a group of witch doctors, who talk like scientists and
use scientific language. In fact, they are often from the academia, but from a
different branch of science called 'witch doctor science' in homolog.us
English and 'economic and social science' in American English. They even write
technical paper with lot of statistical analysis, which appear flawless to
casual observers until you dig deeper (check first comment
[here](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/08/05/tragedy-of-the-day-pnas-
got-duped-by-positivity-lady/)) .

**Solution from 'witch doctor science'**

Witch doctors found out that the HOST was dead and realized that the a living
host was vital (pun intended) to keep the parasites alive. So, they
recommended a replacement 'HOST' - student debt.

![20130814_loans1](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2013/08/20130814_loans1-300x213.jpg)

Let us do the math. About [21M
students](http://nces.ed.gov/fastfacts/display.asp?id=372) went to

college in 2012 for undergraduate degrees. The HOST died in 2008, which means
the extra borrowing between 2008-2012 ($10K/student in u/g) had been fake.

$21M times 10K = $210B.

NSF Annual budget = $8B

NIH annual budget = $30B

You do the math.

**Replacement host is dying too :(**

Fast forward to 2013. Now, we have a second problem on top of the first one.
The replacement host is dying too, and you can find the implications from
[this article](http://www.zerohedge.com/news/2013-08-14/record-student-loan-
debt-crushes-american-enterpreneurial-spirit).

> The rising mountain of student debt, recently closing in on $1.2 trillion,
is forcing some entrepreneurs to abandon startup dreams and others, including
Christine Carney of Orono, Maine, to radically reshape their business plans.

The above paragraph means the witch doctor solution kept the parasites alive
for only 4-5 years, but it also assured the graduating students cannot form
new businesses or be independent in other forms. Without new entrepreneurship,
less taxes will be paid to the government and there will be less resources for
the parasites in the long run.

Any question?

For other entertaining and less entertaining commentaries on similar topic,
please check -

[When to Leave the Academia (University
Cartel)?](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2012/12/03/when-to-leave-the-
academia-university-cartel/)

[The closing of American
Academia](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/students/2012/08/23/the-closing-of-
american-academia/)

[The Red Queens Race of University Tuition and Student
Debt](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/students/2013/07/29/the-red-queens-race-of-
university-tuition-and-student-debt/)

