---
title: 'Koonin: The Origin and Early Evolution of Eukaryotes in the Light of Phylogenomics'
categories:
- ncRNA
---
Readers will find [this review paper](http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/5/209)
by Eugene Koonin useful. It was published in 2010.
<!--more-->

> The origin of eukaryotes is a huge enigma and a major challenge for
evolutionary biology [1-3]. There is a sharp divide in the organizational
complexity of the cell between eukaryotes, which have complex intracellular
compartmentalization, and even the most sophisticated prokaryotes (archaea and
bacteria), which do not [4-6]. A typical eukaryotic cell is about 1,000-fold
bigger by volume than a typical bacterium or archaeon, and functions under
different physical principles: free diffusion has little role in eukaryotic
cells, but is crucial in prokaryotes [7,8]. The compartmentalization of
eukaryotic cells is supported by an elaborate endomembrane system and by the
actin-tubulin-based cytoskeleton [9,10]. There are no direct counterparts of
these organelles in archaea or bacteria. The other hallmark of the eukaryotic
cell is the presence of mitochondria, which have a central role in energy
transformation and perform many additional roles in eukaryotic cells, such as
in signaling and cell death.

The conservation of the major features of cellular organization and the
existence of a large set of genes that are conserved across eukaryotes leave
no doubt that all extant eukaryotic forms evolved from a last eukaryote common
ancestor (LECA; see below). All eukaryotes that have been studied in
sufficient detail possess either mitochondria or organelles derived from
mitochondria [11-13], so it is thought that LECA already possessed
mitochondria (see below). Plants and many unicellular eukaryotes also have
another type of organelle, plastids.

The organizational complexity of the eukaryotic cells is complemented by
extremely sophisticated, cross-talking signaling networks [14]. The main
signaling systems in eukaryotes are the kinase-phosphatase machinery that
regulates protein function through phosphorylation and dephosphorylation
[15-18]; the ubiquitin network that governs protein turnover and localization
through reversible protein ubiquitylation [19-21]; regulation of translation
by microRNAs [22-24]; and regulation of transcription at the levels of
individual genes and chromatin remodeling [24-27]. Eukaryotes all share the
main features of cellular architecture and the regulatory circuitry that
clearly differentiate them from prokaryotes, although the ancestral forms of
some signature eukaryotic systems are increasingly detected in prokaryotes, as
discussed below. Phylogenomic reconstructions show that the characteristic
eukaryotic complexity arose almost 'ready made', without any intermediate
grades seen between the prokaryotic and eukaryotic levels of organization
[9,28-30]. Explaining this apparent leap in complexity at the origin of
eukaryotes is one of the principal challenges of evolutionary biology.

The key to the origin of eukaryotes will undoubtedly be found using
comparative genomics of eukaryotes, archaea and bacteria. Complete genome
sequences from all three domains of cellular life are accumulating
exponentially, albeit at markedly different paces. As of March 2010, the NCBI
genome database contained over 1,000 bacterial genomes, about 100 archaeal
genomes, and about 100 genomes of eukaryotes [31]. Here, I discuss some of the
main insights that have come from comparative analysis of these genomes, which
may help to shed light on the origin and the early stages of evolution of
eukaryotes. So far, the comparative genomics era has brought fascinating clues
but no decisive breakthrough.

