---
title: A Very Good Discussion on 'Missing Heritability Problem'
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Evan Charney from Duke Institute for Brain Science, Duke University wrote an
informative commentary titled -
<!--more-->

[Still Chasing Ghosts: A New Genetic Methodology Will Not Find the Missing
Heritability](http://www.independentsciencenews.org/health/still-chasing-
ghosts-a-new-genetic-methodology-will-not-find-the-missing-heritability/)

It touches on many issues we discuss here regarding using massive volume of
data to find genetic clues for complex diseases, and talks about yet another
ENCODEsque junk science project called GCTA, or Genome-wide complex trait
analysis.

>

One of the hopes and promises of the Human Genome Sequencing Project was that
it would revolutionize the understanding, diagnosis, and treatment of most
human disorders.

[snip]

And to date, not a single polymorphism has been reliably associated with any
psychiatric disorders nor any aspect of human behavior within the normal range
(e.g., differences in intelligence).

To some researchers this state of affairs has given rise to a conundrum known
as the problem of missing heritability. If traits such as intelligence are
reported to be 50% heritable, goes the theory, why have no genes associated
with intelligence been identified?

Why does it not work? Well, we have the same culprits - (i) false positives,
(ii) false model.

On false positives, here is the short summary of a paragraph with detailed
description -

>

**GCTA studies are highly vulnerable to confounding by population stratification**

Genetic studies (by whatever method) that have so far purported to identify
SNPs associated with one or another trait have more often than not been false
positives [18-20]. A prime cause of this has been the failure of researchers
to take adequately into account population stratification.

The problem of 'false model' is even more critical.

> **Further problems of GCTA**

While I have focused on population stratification, there are at least two
other things to note about GCTA studies. First, GCTA assumes additive genetic
variance, i.e., that each polymorphism contributes a tiny amount to
heritability and that the effects of all the polymorphisms can simply be added
together. This ignores widespread evidence that genes influence the effects of
other genes in highly complex, non-additive ways (G x G interactions), and
that the environment influences the manner in which genes are transcribed in
equally complex ways (G x E interactions). Second, all GCTA estimates are
derived from looking only at SNPs, but SNPs are only one form of genetic
polymorphism. There are numerous other kinds of prevalent genetic variations,
including copy number variations, multiple copies of segments of genes, whole
genes, and even whole chromosomes. There is no rational scientific reason to
assume that SNPs are the only relevant, or even the most important form of
genetic variation (other than the fact that SNP data is easiest to obtain).

The article received many good comments from others appalled by these wasteful
stamp-collection projects. Ken Weiss, Penn State professor and [long-term
critic of junk sciences like ENCODE, GWAS, GCAT,
etc.](http://ecodevoevo.blogspot.com/), wrote -

> I agree with what is said here generally, but I dont think it will make the
missing heritability (Mh) problem go away. There are too many people who for
many different reasons believe that more sophisticated or greater sampling, or
more extensive sequencing and analysis, and larger studies, paired with animal
models, will eventually account for Mh. Whether this is a correct belief or as
much a rationale for funding continual increases in study scale, is debatable.

Rare variants reflect one out that is often invoked, and they certainly
require large studies of one sort or another. The question here is whether
enumerating rare variants and demonstrating their causal role (if it can
actually be done) will do much, especially since most rare variants will be
like their more common known ones, and have very small individual effects.

Another strategy is to blame the mH on interactions. Huge studies or very
clever designs may identify such interactions and evaluate their import,
perhaps at least generically if not by enumeration.

So the problem will, I predict, persist. That doesnt mean the claims about how
to find mH are justified.

However, the comment by M. C. Jones summarizes the state of affairs in two
sentences.

> Failed paradigms have a way of slouching on from beyond the grave after
theyve been declared dead, especially if they have become lucrative,
prestigious, and elaborate industries supporting many livelihoods and paying
the mortgages on many yachts.

We recommend the readers to go through both the article and the comments. You
will find a lot to think about in the back and forth discussions.

