---
title: Evolution before Genes - Two Review Papers
categories:
- ncRNA
---
[The RNA world hypothesis: the worst theory of the early evolution of life
(except for all the others)](http://www.biologydirect.com/content/7/1/23)
<!--more-->

> The problems associated with the RNA world hypothesis are well known. In the
following I discuss some of these difficulties, some of the alternative
hypotheses that have been proposed, and some of the problems with these
alternative models. From a biosynthetic as well as, arguably, evolutionary
perspective, DNA is a modified RNA, and so the chicken-and-egg dilemma of
which came first? boils down to a choice between RNA and protein. This is not
just a question of cause and effect, but also one of statistical likelihood,
as the chance of two such different types of macromolecule arising
simultaneously would appear unlikely. The RNA world hypothesis is an example
of a top down (or should it be present back?) approach to early evolution: how
can we simplify modern biological systems to give a plausible evolutionary
pathway that preserves continuity of function? The discovery that RNA
possesses catalytic ability provides a potential solution: a single
macromolecule could have originally carried out both replication and
catalysis. RNA, which constitutes the genome of RNA viruses, and catalyzes
peptide synthesis on the ribosome, could have been both the chicken and the
egg! However, the following objections have been raised to the RNA world
hypothesis: (i) RNA is too complex a molecule to have arisen prebiotically;
(ii) RNA is inherently unstable; (iii) catalysis is a relatively rare property
of long RNA sequences only; and (iv) the catalytic repertoire of RNA is too
limited. I will offer some possible responses to these objections in the light
of work by our and other labs. Finally, I will critically discuss an
alternative theory to the RNA world hypothesis known as proteins first, which
holds that proteins either preceded RNA in evolution, or, at the very least,
that proteins and RNA coevolved. I will argue that, while theoretically
possible, such a hypothesis is probably unprovable, and that the RNA world
hypothesis, although far from perfect or complete, is the best we currently
have to help understand the backstory to contemporary biology.

In the same context, here is another interesting article -

[Evolution before genes](http://www.biologydirect.com/content/7/1/1)

> Background

Our current understanding of evolution is so tightly linked to template-
dependent replication of DNA and RNA molecules that the old idea from Oparin
of a self-reproducing 'garbage bag' ('coacervate') of chemicals that predated
fully-fledged cell-like entities seems to be farfetched to most scientists
today. However, this is exactly the kind of scheme we propose for how
Darwinian evolution could have occurred prior to template replication.

Results

We cannot confirm previous claims that autocatalytic sets of organic polymer
molecules could undergo evolution in any interesting sense by themselves.
While we and others have previously imagined inhibition would result in
selectability, we found that it produced multiple attractors in an
autocatalytic set that cannot be selected for. Instead, we discovered that if
general conditions are satisfied, the accumulation of adaptations in chemical
reaction networks can occur. These conditions are the existence of rare
reactions producing viable cores (analogous to a genotype), that sustains a
molecular periphery (analogous to a phenotype).

Conclusions

We conclude that only when a chemical reaction network consists of many such
viable cores, can it be evolvable. When many cores are enclosed in a
compartment there is competition between cores within the same compartment,
and when there are many compartments, there is between-compartment competition
due to the phenotypic effects of cores and their periphery at the compartment
level. Acquisition of cores by rare chemical events, and loss of cores at
division, allows macromutation, limited heredity and selectability, thus
explaining how a poor man's natural selection could have operated prior to
genetic templates. This is the only demonstration to date of a mechanism by
which pre-template accumulation of adaptation could occur.

