---
title: GPL License is Dying in the World Outside Bioinformatics (aka Real World)
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Over the last 2-3 years, we have been noticing an interesting trend in the
software world. GPL is dead and MIT/BSD/Apache-2 types of licenses are
spreading everywhere. Only when we come to the academic world of
bioinformatics, we find large majority of codes still being released under one
or other form of GPL.
<!--more-->

We have been observing the death of GPL everywhere - at github, in various
software communities and in languages and libraries newly released by
companies/academia.

1\. For example, you can check the most downloaded PHP packages
[here](https://packagist.org/explore/popular). None of them is released with
GPL any more.

2\. Or check the license for [code of Google's GO
language](http://golang.org/LICENSE).

3\. If you argue that Google is too big and can afford to throw a few
freebies, [check the license of Julia
language](https://github.com/JuliaLang/julia/blob/master/LICENSE.md) released
by three programmers.

4\. We have been checking all over github for highly used programs and
packages, and we notice the same pattern - GPL is dead and MIT/BSD are
everywhere.

![](http://www.globalnerdy.com/wordpress/wp-
content/uploads/2009/07/titus_brown_1.jpg)

What is going on? To find out, we asked Titus Brown, one of the rare non-GPL
bioinformaticians for his reason to use BSD over GPL.

He explained:

> I have one simple reason: BSD maximizes use. I have lots of background in
OSS (going back to 1988 or so) and while I personally agree ethically with
GPL, as a publicly funded scientist I believe that I should be maximizing the
utility of what I do. This clearly indicates a non-contaminatory license.

Titus is correct. GPL is avoided by developers, because it restricts sharing
and collaborative projects and imposes the will of the GPL-licensor on the
others. Phil Sturgeon, a highly skilled web-developer, shared the following
figure in his twitter channel describing the evolution of web technology -

![BehhXbHIAAA5QtD](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2014/01
/BehhXbHIAAA5QtD-225x300.jpg)

Such extensive sharing of libraries and code would not have been possible
without each library being released under BSD/MIT-type license.

