---
title: An Update on Our Nanopore Petition for Lex Nederbragt's Group
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Dear Readers,
<!--more-->

Here is an update regarding [our petition to Oxford Nanopore](https://docs.goo
gle.com/spreadsheet/viewform?formkey=dDhGRUJsUDVyaXRVNmRJMHJGczRSRWc6MA).

To provide a little background, during AGBT, we learned that Lex Nederbragts
groups request for early access to ONT Minion had been denied. We created an
online petition to request the company to reconsider their decision.

Our primary motivation was to see an objective comparison between the long
reads generated from PacBio and Oxford Nanopore, and Lex's group has strong
experience with the former technology. High error rate is one recurring
feature of long reads from PacBio (and maybe Oxford Nanopore, based on [these
slides](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/03/12/oxford-nanopore-slides-
say-50kb-read-length-easily-obtained/)), but a number of bioinformatics tools
have been developed to handle them. Someone with knowledge of those tools can
compare the technologies fairly without getting bogged down with noisy long
reads. Moreover, Lex is very comfortable with next-gen media (twitter, blog)
and we will not have to wait for his paper to know what he found.

After getting a number of signatures, we were trying to figure out the best
way to reach the company. We initially assumed that it would be hard to hear
back from them, if we simply submitted the petition in a custom form on their
website or sent to the 'media' email address. So, we requested [Nick
Loman](http://pathogenomics.bham.ac.uk/blog/2013/03/a-chat-with-oxford-
nanopores-clive-brown-at-agbt-2013/) by email for help to find someone, but he
was not very interested in our efforts. Finally, we decided to do what we
decided against in the first place, namely contact the company directly at
their media address.

That was a pleasant surprise. Zoe McDougall, the communication director of
ONT, was lightening fast in replying back to us. She explained that they had
an overwhelmingly large number of requests for early access, and the company
used a random selection to pick a subset from those. It is too late to change
that decision.

But here is the good news !! She mentioned that the company will consider our
petition for the next wave of invitees to MAP. We are planning to submit it at
the end of next week, and you can still sign it [here](https://docs.google.com
/spreadsheet/viewform?formkey=dDhGRUJsUDVyaXRVNmRJMHJGczRSRWc6MA) if you find
our efforts worthwhile.

Here is the text for the petition -

> Genome scientist Lex Nederbragt has been very active in the online community
about sharing information on next-generation sequencing technologies. Also,
his blog is generally considered fair, impartial and objective regarding
various technologies. We are saddened to learn that his request for early
access to Minion has been rejected. Since Nanopore sequencing is considered an
important technology by many researchers (incl. us), we believe our knowledge
and decision about the technology will be greatly enhanced by evaluation done
by Dr. Nederbragt.

Although writing a comment is optional in the petition form, a number of
others praised him strongly. Examples -

> I completely subscribe this petition. If it wasn't for the activity of Lex
on Twitter, I wouldn't know half of what I know about other single-molecule
sequencing technologies.

> Lex is a very fair& creative guy& charming in person; he would make an
excellent early access participant

> We at [removed] would love to see Lex get early access to the MinION
platform as we're sure he would provide a fair, balanced, interesting and
articulate evaluation.

