---
title: Columbia U. Kicks Out 'Star' Profs for not Getting Enough NIH Grants to Cover
  80% Salary
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
This is the first of a two-part series to cover the changing dynamics of
academia in USA and other Western countries.
<!--more-->

Inside Higher Education wrote in [Grant Quota to Be
Paid](http://www.insidehighered.com/news/2014/03/10/columbia-criticized-not-
renewing-long-term-professors-over-their-failure-pay) \-

> You study homelessness, or female sexuality, and are considered a leader in
your field. You aren't tenure-track but you've been a star teacher at your
institution -- one of the nation's wealthiest -- for many years. Should you
lose your job for failing to raise 80 percent of your salary in outside
grants?

If you ask us, the answer is resounding yes. US academia painted itself into a
corner by (i) being fully reliant on the government and (ii) supporting one
party over another, when both are equally war-mongering. The correct stand
would have been to stay independent and be equally critical of all
politicians. In contrast, even previously top-tier journals like Nature, in
their infinite wisdom, [decided to start backing US presidential candidates
since
2008](http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v455/n7217/full/4551149a.html).

The [original tenure system was
created](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tenure_\(academic\)#From_1900_to_1940)
to make sure that the funding sources had no say over the opinions of
scholars, but now very few tenured and untenured professors are ready to
criticize the government decisions. In fact, they go to the extent of
misleading public on government shutdown, as we outlined here.

[US Science Funding Proposal for a Better
Alternative](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/10/14/us-science-funding-
let-us/)

Getting back to the [Inside Higher Education
story](http://www.insidehighered.com/news/2014/03/10/columbia-criticized-not-
renewing-long-term-professors-over-their-failure-pay), here are the key
points.

i) Carole Vance and Kim Hopper are two medical anthropologists among a large
group of non-tenure-track public health faculty losing their appointments.

ii) The professors are expected to get 80% of their salary covered from
grants. That also means they will have to spend 80% of time working on
projects related to those grants and fit teaching + chasing other grants in
remaining 20% of time.

iii) University wants them to get NIH grants because -

> The professor said Columbia prefers National Institutes of Health grants,
due to their high, pre-negotiated overhead rates of 63 percent.

This is one aspect of contemporary University system that we often come back
to. They have very bloated administrative structure supported by grant
overheads and now the parasites have taken over the house.

![](http://www.oftwominds.com/photos10/lifecycle-bureaucracy.png)

[Of Two Minds blog gave the following
examples](http://www.oftwominds.com/blogaug10/ratchet-effect08-10.html) and
explained what is going on and will happen using the above simple picture.

> UC Davis' administration fattened up in a way few other campuses nationwide
could match from 1993 to 2007, with the third-highest increase in ratio of
administrators to students among 198 universities.

UCD went from 3.2 full-time administrators per 100 students to 13.5. That
321.9 percent increase also was the highest in the 10-campus University of
California system.

The figures are included in Administrative Bloat at American Universities: The
Real Reason for High Costs in Higher Education.

Here is a telling tidbit from that report:

Arizona State University, for example, increased the number of administrators
per 100 students by 94 percent during this period while actually reducing the
number of employees engaged in instruction, research and service by 2 percent.
Nearly half of all full-time employees at Arizona State University are
administrators.

It is not that the Universities lack money, as you can see from the following
chart.

![](http://www.oftwominds.com/photos2013/college-inflation7-13.gif)

or even by taking the example of Columbia University -

> In addition to the petitions, graduate students voiced concerns about the
layoffs at an assembly last month. They said the layoffs seemed particularly
distasteful in light of a Columbias recent announcement that it had completed
a $6.1 billion capital campaign, the biggest successful drive in Ivy League
history.

It is just that they lack money for scholarly purposes. Here is the good news.
The entire mainstream academic system is going to collapse due to competition
from the internet, leaving evolutionary biologists with another puzzle to
think about in addition to the extinction of dinosaurs.

For a more mainstream spin of the Columbia story, please check -

[Columbia Tosses Out Star Faculty Researchers for Failing to Pay 80% of Their
Own Way](http://www.nakedcapitalism.com/2014/03/columbia-tosses-star-faculty-
researchers-failing-pay-80-way.html)

