---
title: Alarming - Is Nature using Legalese to Dupe Scientists?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
When scientists hand over their valued papers to journals, they sign a bunch
of paperworks. Kevin Smith, JD working at Duke University, went through the
legal language of one such contract issued by Nature Publishing Group. The
following sentence from his blog post is the most disturbing ("But a careful
reading shows that the retention of copyright under this license is
essentially a sham."), because we have been fooled by the same language. We
are posting the critical part of his analysis below.
<!--more-->

[Attacking academic values](http://blogs.library.duke.edu/scholcomm/2014/03/27
/attacking-academic-values/)

>

As my sense of outrage grew, I began to explore the NPG website. Initially I
was looking to see if authors were told about the waiver requirement upfront.
As far as I can tell, they are not, in spite of rhetoric about transparency in
the information for authors page. The need for a waiver is not even mentioned
on the checklist that is supposed to guide authors through the publication
process. It seems that this requirement is communicated to authors only after
their papers have been accepted. I suspect that NPG is ashamed of their
stratagem, and in my opinion they should be. But as I looked at NPG policies,
and especially its License to Publish, my concern for our authors grew much
deeper.

Two concerns make me think that authors need to be carefully warned before
they publish in an NPG journal.

First, because this contract is a license and tells authors that they retain
copyright, it may give authors a false sense that they are keeping something
valuable. But a careful reading shows that the retention of copyright under
this license is essentially a sham. The license is exclusive and irrevocable,
and it encompasses all of the rights granted under copyright. It lasts for as
long as copyright itself last. In short, authors are left with nothing at all,
except the limited set of rights that are granted back to authors by the
agreement. This is not much different than publishing with other journals that
admit up front that they require a transfer of copyright; my concern is that
this one is dressed up as a license, so authors may not realize that they are
being just as completely shorn of their rights as they are by other
publishers.

My bigger concern, however, is found in clause 7 of the NPG license, which
reads in its entirety:

The Author(s) hereby waive or agree not to assert (where such waiver is not

possible at law) any and all moral rights they may now or in the future hold

in connection with the Contribution and the Supplementary Information.

I dont think most publishers require authors to waive moral rights (I have
actually added them in to a publication contract), and insisting on doing so
is a serious threat to core academic values. Moral rights are recognized by
most countries of the world (including the UK, where NPG has its corporate
offices) and usually include two basic rights the right of attribution and the
right to preserve the integrity of ones work. The United States is something
of an outlier in that we do not have a formal recognition of moral rights in
our copyright law, although we always assert that these values are protected
by other laws. But my point here is to wonder why NPG requires all of its
authors to waive their right of attribution. This is not an incidental matter;
the clause is carefully structured to attempt to get authors even from the
countries that do not allow the waiver of moral rights they are considered
that important still to promise not to assert those rights (whether or not
that would be enforceable in those countries). Nature actively does not want
its authors to be able to insist that their names always be associated with
their work. Why? Does NPG imagine reusing articles it is given to publish in
other ways, without providing proper attribution? If this seems like a remote
possibility, it remains the only conceivable reason that NPG would insert this
bizarre clause.

An editor from Nature replied to him about the 'moral right' issue, and our
[readers can see it here](http://blogs.library.duke.edu/scholcomm/2014/03/27
/attacking-academic-values/).

