---
title: Ethan Perlstein Goes Indy - What Gives?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
This is the second of a two-part series to cover the changing dynamics of
academia in USA and other Western countries. In the first part, we discussed
about bloated university system in ["Columbia U. Kicks Out 'Star' Profs for
not Getting Enough NIH Grants to Cover 80%
Salary"](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/03/14/columbia-u-fires-senior-
faculty-researchers-getting-80-salary-grants/).
<!--more-->

[Scientist's Experiment in Fundraising -Scientist Plans to Raise $1.5 Million
Through Online Solicitations](http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB1000142405
2702303743604579354831111502624)

![](http://si.wsj.net/public/resources/images/BN-
BJ237_0204di_D_20140204175158.jpg)

> Ethan O. Perlstein for years followed a traditional path as a scientist. He
earned a Ph.D. in molecular biology from Harvard, spent five years doing
postdoctoral research at Princeton and led a team that published two papers on
pharmacology.

But last year, Dr. Perlstein was turned down by 27 universities when he sought
a tenure-track position to set up his own lab. Hundreds of candidates had
applied for a small number of positions, the universities said, a situation
made worse by cuts in federal research funding.

So Dr. Perlstein decided to raise $1.5 million for his lab in a different way:
through crowdfunding.

That is a very commendable effort and an expected outcome of the parasitic
bloat at the universities. As we explained in many commentaries -

(i) Internet is cutting down the cost of communication and thus the cost of
teaching/research,

(ii) Universities are becoming utterly incompetent by fully relying on debt-
funded grants and debt-funded student tuition,

(iii) The centralized bureaucracy at the government likes to reward big
wasteful projects from by people they know well,

(iv) The money for those centralized projects come from taxpayers
(individuals, small businesses, mid-sized businesses), who are feeling pinch
in their own life due to competition from (i).

If you follow (i)-(iv) to a logical conclusion, you will clearly see that the
current university system will collapse on its own weight. Therefore, it is
necessary to have an alternative in place to continue scientific progress, as
we discussed below.

[US Science Funding Proposal for a Better
Alternative](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/10/14/us-science-funding-
let-us/)

[US Science Funding Proposal for a Better Alternative (Part
II)](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/10/15/alternative-part-ii/)

Will crowd-funding work? It should, given that tax-funded research is a
wasteful way to crowd-fund science anyway.

> Dr. Perlstein and a colleague created a short video explaining the concept
and posted it on RocketHub. The scientists offered prizes, including the
chance to talk science over beer for people who donated $100 or more. The men
quickly raised $25,000 from family, friends and strangers. Experiments on the
theory are under way.

Still, crowdfunding for scientific research poses challenges.

Margaret Anderson, executive director of FasterCures, a group that tries to
accelerate the development of drugs, agreed that crowdfunding allows the
public to play a greater role in science. The problem, she said, can come when
people without a strong understanding of science watch a pitch on YouTube and
try to determine "which idea is good and which isn't.''

That, some say, could result in sexy but scientifically questionable research
being funded while less flashy but worthier efforts aren't.

The real challenges are elsewhere, as discussed by several readers of 'In the
Pipeline' blog. The centralized government created myriads of laws that the
small organization like the one by Perlstein will have to abide by.

[Crowdfunding Independent Research](http://pipeline.corante.com/archives/2014/
02/06/crowdfunding_independent_research.php)

> A qualified or accredited investor is a specific term defined in Rule 501(a)
of Regulation D. By getting investment only from qualified investors one
substantially simplifies the amount of paperwork, regulatory approval, and
potential legal problems.

This is something I'v always wondered about crowdsourcing. How entities handle
not only the question of accredited investors but also getting around
regulations which limit "general solicitations".

> The only way it works with small investors is they are given a product in
return - or the promise of a product. So, if I invest $100 in his 'research'
it is illegal according to the SEC (that is another story of government
meddling) but if he in turn sends me say three coupons that can be redeemed
for some product or service, it does not get the interest of the SEC.

>

Seems a little green to me with no MENTION OF PATENTS-

When trying to make money in science they really mean a lot to investors.

