---
title: No Clear Link Between Passive Smoking and Lung Cancer
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Last month, Journal of National Cancer Institute reported on a surprising
result. The surprise was on two fronts - (i) the unexpectedness of the
finding, (ii) not a single major media channel chose to report on it. That is
quite odd, because you would expect media to be extra happy to report any
puzzling finding.
<!--more-->

[No Clear Link Between Passive Smoking and Lung Cancer](http://jnci.oxfordjour
nals.org/content/early/2013/12/05/jnci.djt365.extract)

> A large prospective cohort study of more than 76,000 women confirmed a
strong association between cigarette smoking and lung cancer but found no link
between the disease and secondhand smoke.

The fact that passive smoking may not be strongly associated with lung cancer
points to a need to find other risk factors for the disease [in nonsmokers],
said Ange Wang, the Stanford University medical student who presented the
study at the June 2013 meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology in
Chicago.

Investigators from Stanford and other research centers looked at data from the
Womens Health Initiative Observational Study (WHI-OS). Among 93,676 women aged
5079 years at enrollment, the study had complete smoking and covariate data
(including passive smoking exposure in childhood, adult home, and work) for
76,304 participants. Of those, 901 developed lung cancer over 10.5 mean years
of follow-up.

The incidence of lung cancer was 13 times higher in current smokers and four
times higher in former smokers than in never-smokers, and the relationship for
both current and former smokers depended on level of exposure. However, among
women who had never smoked, exposure to passive smoking overall, and to most
tags: []
categories of passive smoking, did not statistically significantly increase
lung cancer risk. **The only category of exposure that showed a trend toward
increased risk was living in the same house with a smoker for 30 years or
more.**

We looked around and found only one mention of the above study in media, and
that too is in a blog maintained by UK's Telegraph. James Delingpole wrote -

[Passive smoking another of the Nanny State's big
lies](http://blogs.telegraph.co.uk/news/jamesdelingpole/100251229/passive-
smoking-another-of-the-nanny-states-big-lies/)

> It was, after all, a decade ago that the British Medical Journal, published
the results of a massive, long-term survey into the effects of second-hand
tobacco smoke. Between 1959 and 1989 two American researchers named James
Enstrom and Geoffrey Kabat surveyed no few than 118,094 Californians. Fierce
anti-smoking campaigners themselves, they began the research because they
wanted to prove once and for all what a pernicious, socially damaging habit
smoking was. Their research was initiated by the American Cancer Society and
supported by the anti-smoking Tobacco Related Disease Research Program.

At least it was at first. But then something rather embarrassing happened.
Much to their surprise, Kabat and Enstrom discovered that exposure to
environmental tobacco smoke (ie passive smoking), no matter how intense or
prolonged, creates no significantly increased risk of heart disease or lung
cancer.

Similar conclusions were reached by the World Health Organisation which
concluded in 1998 after a seven-year study that the correlation between
"passive smoking" and lung cancer was not "statistically significant." A 2002
report by the Greater London Assembly agreed. So too did an investigation by
the House of Lords Economic Affairs Committee.

Yet between 2006 and 2007 smoking was banned in all enclosed public places
throughout the United Kingdom largely on the basis of the claim widely
promulgated by bansturbating politicians and kill-joy activists that it was
necessary to protect the health of non-smokers. On the basis, in other words,
of a blatant and scientifically demonstrable lie.

