---
title: Origins and Evolution of the Formin Multigene Family That Is Involved in the
  Formation of Actin Filaments
categories:
- ncRNA
---
[Here ](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18840602)is another eukaryotic gene
family. Recent discovery.
<!--more-->

> In eukaryotes, the assembly and elongation of unbranched actin filaments is
controlled by formins, which are long, multidomain proteins. These proteins
are important for dynamic cellular processes such as determination of cell
shape, cell division, and cellular interaction. Yet, no comprehensive study
has been done about the origins and evolution of this gene family. We
therefore performed extensive phylogenetic and motif analyses of the formin
genes by examining 597 prokaryotic and 53 eukaryotic genomes. Additionally, we
used three-dimensional protein structure data in an effort to uncover
distantly related sequences. Our results suggest that the formin homology 2
(FH2) domain, which promotes the formation of actin filaments, is a eukaryotic
innovation and apparently originated only once in eukaryotic evolution.
Despite the high degree of FH2 domain sequence divergence, the FH2 domains of
most eukaryotic formins are predicted to assume the same fold and thus have
similar functions. The formin genes have experienced multiple taxon-specific
duplications and followed the birth-and-death model of evolution.
Additionally, the formin genes experienced taxonspecific genomic
rearrangements that led to the acquisition of unrelated protein domains. The
evolutionary diversification of formin genes apparently increased the number
of formin's interacting molecules and consequently contributed to the
development of a complex and precise actin assembly mechanism. The diversity
of formin types is probably related to the range of actin-based cellular
processes that different cells or organisms require. Our results indicate the
importance of gene duplication and domain acquisition in the evolution of the
eukaryotic cell and offer insights into how a complex system, such as the
cytoskeleton, evolved.

Also check -

Formins and Microtubules

F. Bartolini and G. G. Gundersen

> Formins have recently been recognized as prominent regulators of the
microtubule (MT) cytoskeleton where they modulate the dynamics of selected MTs
in interphase and mitosis. The association of formins with the MT cytoskeleton
and their action on MT dynamics are relatively unexplored areas, yet growing
evidence supports a direct role in their regulation of MT stability
independent of their activity on actin. Formins regulate MT stability alone or
in combination with accessory MT binding proteins that have previously been
implicated in the stabilization of MTs downstream of polarity cues. As actin
and MT arrays are typically remodeled downstream of signaling pathways that
orchestrate cell shape and division, formins are emerging as excellent
candidates for coordinating the responses of the cytoskeletal in diverse
regulated and homeostatic processes.

