---
title: 'Posters and Slides from #BoG14'
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
1\. **K. M. Steinberg - A Single Haplotype Genome Assembly** (Please click on
image to view slide at figshare)
<!--more-->

![ccc](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2014/05/ccc1-300x190.png)

2\. **Christopher DeBoever - SF3B1 mutations in different cancer types cause
recognition of sterically hindered cryptic splice sites downstream of the
branch point**

![](http://previews.figshare.com/1477944/860/p_01.png)

3\. **Jia-Xing Yue - Insight into cephalochordate evolution from a genomic
study of the Bahama amphioxus, Asymmetron lucayanum** (changed mind and
requested us to take down, because of unpublished data)

> Cephalochordates (commonly known as amphioxus or lancelets) refers to a
group of marine animals that are the modern survivors of one ancestral
chordate lineage whose phylogenetic position falls at the boundary between
invertebrates and vertebrates. Previous study showed that they possess many
primitive features in morphology, development and also genomic architecture
and thus are considered as the best living proxy for ancestral chordates
before the rise of vertebrates. In this study, we performed both RNA-Seq and
whole genome shotgun sequencing for the Bahama amphioxus, Asymmetron
lucayanum. The comparison between Asymmetron lucayanum with another distantly
related cephalochordate species, Branchiostoma floridae, together with several
representative vertebrate species was conducted for both coding and noncoding
regions. For the coding regions, we found cephalochordates evolve more slowly
than vertebrates, which is consistent with their apparent morphological
evolutionary stasis. However, genes involved in innate immunity are notably
evolving faster. For the noncoding regions, we identified ~170,000
cephalochordate conserved noncoding elements (cCNEs) shared between Asymmetron
and Branchiostoma using on a reads-mapping based approach. We also examined
the genomic distribution, functional association and evolutionary trajectories
of these cephalochordate CNEs in the context of chordate evolution.

4\. Unknown author, who does not lack originality -

![BnI_QVXIAAEO3Sz](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2014/05
/BnI_QVXIAAEO3Sz-300x225.jpg)

