---
title: Dangerous Central Planners Coming to 'Rescue' US Biomedical Research
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
![](http://molbio.princeton.edu/images/faculty/photos/tilghman_pic_fp_inner.jp
g)
<!--more-->

Four fools enamored with central planning ([Bruce
Alberts](http://biochemistry.ucsf.edu/labs/alberts/), [Marc W.
Kirschner](http://kirschner.med.harvard.edu/), [Shirley
Tilghman](http://molbio.princeton.edu/faculty/molbio-faculty/137-tilghman),
and [Harold
Varmus](http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/medicine/laureates/1989/varmus-
bio.html)) wrote an article in PNAS titled -

[Rescuing US biomedical research from its systemic
flaws](http://www.pnas.org/content/early/2014/04/09/1404402111)

The abstract ends with -

> Instead, it is time to confront the dangers at hand and rethink some
fundamental features of the US biomedical research ecosystem.

After reading the above line, we were elated with joy and thought they were
going to recommend shutting down the central planning agencies. Sadly, we were
wrong, wrong and wrong. The article is full of half truths (e.g. never
mentions waste due to war), plans on how fix the damages done by central
planning as well as plans to develop even more plans. To spare you from
reading, here is a comprehensive summary of the entire article -

> We recommend that the US government develop a plan to revise these practices
gradually over the next decade while providing a discrete timetable.

Next decade? Exactly one commentary from our blog is needed to show how out of
touch those planners are, and it is linked below. As we mentioned, the
forecast by Harvard professor is on the optimistic side.

[Harvard Professor Predicts up to Half of US Universities May Fail in 15
Years](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/students/2014/04/15/harvard-professor-
predicts-up-to-half-of-us-universities-may-fail-in-15-years/)

\----------------------------------------------------

Whenever we criticize the planners, some others ask what we would do to 'fix'
the problem, as if we are dying to be another group of central planning fools.
Yes, we do have a plan too and here it is. US government should shut down all
science funding agencies immediately and make a very public announcement about
it. That will have two salubrious effects -

(i) People will have more money in their pockets and they will support science
through other less wasteful channels not involving central planners.

(ii) People will see that the only remaining role of government is to waste
massive amounts of money to fight wars [in countries they cannot find in
map](http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/monkey-cage/wp/2014/04/07/the-less-
americans-know-about-ukraines-location-the-more-they-want-u-s-to-
intervene/?tid=pm_pop). That will hopefully start a clamor for reining in the
military, which will lead to more money in the pockets of people, and thus
more money for science through (i).

If you are shaking your head in disbelief, we recommend the following articles
and videos to fully appreciate the harm to science caused by central planning.

[PFS 2010 - Terence Kealey, Science is a Private Good - Or: Why Government
Science is Wasteful](https://vimeo.com/12598733) from [Sean
Gabb](https://vimeo.com/seangabb) on [Vimeo](https://vimeo.com).

[DORA Pledge YASI from Government-funded
Scientists](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/06/12/dora-pledge-yasi-from-
government-funded-scientists/)

[Government is the Mother of All
Invention](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/06/15/government-is-the-
mother-of-all-invention/)

[Henry R Bourne: A Fair Deal for PhD Students and
Postdocs](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/students/2013/10/02/henry-r-bourne-fair-
deal-phd-students-postdocs/)

[US Science Funding Proposal for a Better
Alternative](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/10/14/us-science-funding-
let-us/)

[US Science Funding Proposal for a Better Alternative (Part
II)](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/10/15/alternative-part-ii/)

