---
title: 'Course: Logical Reasoning in Human Genetics, Aug 18 - 22, Helsinki'
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Our readers know that [we hold professor Ken Weiss in very high
regard](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/07/30/battle-over-gwas-ken-
weiss-edition/) and read updates on [his
blog](http://ecodevoevo.blogspot.com/) everyday. Those interested in going
beyond blog posts and learning about technical matters from him will get
valuable opportunity to join a summer course [he is offering with Drs. Joseph
D. Terwilliger, Anne Buchanan, Markus Perola and Tero Hiekkalinna are offering
a summer course](http://ecodevoevo.blogspot.com/2014/05/logical-reason-in-
human-genetics-aug-18.html#comment-form). Joseph Terwilliger co-authored with
him a Nature Genetics commentary (2000) titled - ["How many diseases does it
take to map a gene with SNPs?"](http://ebbteaching.uni-
muenster.de/courses/tut/storage/papers/weiss-terwilliger-diseases-SNPs-
NG-00.pdf)
<!--more-->

Here is a snippet about the course from his website.

>

This course is designed to examine the conceptual, empirical, and theoretical
approaches to understanding the complex cause and effect relationships
underlying human variation. Despite a century of quantitative research on
evolutionary biology and genetics, our hypotheses about the phenogenetic
(genotype + environment + culture -> phenotype) relationships underlying human
variation seem poorly focused and often based on unnecessarily nave models. In
this course we will review the basics of evolutionary biology, genetic
epidemiology, gene mapping, and how to integrate these three disciplines to
address questions of causality in human genetics.

It is hoped that through this course, students will develop critical thinking
and logical reasoning skills to try and learn from what negative experimental
results tell us about the architecture of disease and to question the
assumptions underlying their experimental approaches to develop better study
designs based on better hypotheses for future studies. The reason experiments
are said to "fail" is usually because the question was poorly posed or the
hypotheses being tested were incompletely thought out and justified, not
because of technical or analytical errors. In fact, the results have been a
major success in showing that the causal landscape is more complex than had
been widely expected, but is in fact consistent with biological and
evolutionary theory.

![](http://www.helsinki.fi/~tsjuntun/LR2014/lr2006_picknic.jpg)

