---
title: Saving Bacteria from Diseases and the Cas9-CRISPR Revolution
categories:
- chem
---
Most NIH-backed funding proposals discuss their plans to wipe out pathogens
like _Streptococcus_ from the face of earth, but some other souls do like
those bacteria and care for their well-being. Fortunately, one such group did
not need government to pay for their research and figured out how to save
_Streptococcus_ from their own diseases. The methods derived by them have
become a major part of new genetic revolution.
<!--more-->

We should mention at the outset that although some _Streptococcus_ strains can
lead to diseases ranging from pink eye, pneunomonia, meningitis to 'flesh-
eating' bacterial infections, other ones are harmless or often friendly.
Especially _[Streptococcus thermophilus_ is widely used in the dairy
industry](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Streptococcus_thermophilus) in cheese
and yogurt production.

![](http://archive.sciencewatch.com/sciencewatch/dr/nhp/images-
nhp/2008/08julnhpHorv.jpeg)

P. Horvath and his colleagues at Danisco noticed that domesticated strains of
_Streptococcus_ were generally prone to phage infection, but some phage-
resistant strains had extra nucleotide sequences in the genome, possibly to
protect them from infection. Those nucleotide sequences appeared in a strange
part of the genome - within short repeat sequences. In fact, those repeats
were not straightforward repeats, but repetitive sequences separated by short
(~24-48 nt) spacer sequences. Based on extensive experimentation, they
established that those repeat-spacer arrays were part of an 'adaptive immune
system' to protect the bacteria from phage infection ([CRISPR Provides
Acquired Resistance Against Viruses in
Prokaryotes](https://www.sciencemag.org/content/315/5819/1709)). [A possible
mechanism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CRISPR) is shown below -

![](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5f/Crispr.png/500px-
Crispr.png)

Since then, the cas-CRISPR system has been adapted to make an extremely
versatile method for DNA editing. We will cover a number of other commentaries
on related papers, but for the time being, please check the following papers -

1\. [wiki on CRISPR](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CRISPR)

2\. Review paper by Jennifer Doudna ([get pdf here](http://biologs.bf.lu.lv/gr
ozs/Mikrobiologijas/BiotehIII/2013/CRSP%20nukleazes%20Nature%202011.pdf))

[RNA-guided genetic silencing systems in bacteria and archaea](http://www.natu
re.com/nature/journal/v482/n7385/full/nature10886.html)

3\. [Cracking CRISPR - a 2009 interview of Horvath](http://www.the-
scientist.com/?articles.view/articleNo/27186/title/Cracking-CRISPR/)

4\. [RNA-guided human genome engineering via Cas9 - George Church
paper](http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC3712628)

5\. [Repurposing CRISPR as an RNA-Guided Platform for Sequence-Specific
Control of Gene
Expression](http://www.cell.com/abstract/S0092-8674\(13\)00211-0)

> Targeted gene regulation on a genome-wide scale is a powerful strategy for
interrogating, perturbing, and engineering cellular systems. Here, we develop
a method for controlling gene expression based on Cas9, an RNA-guided DNA
endonuclease from a type II CRISPR system. We show that a catalytically dead
Cas9 lacking endonuclease activity, when coexpressed with a guide RNA,
generates a DNA recognition complex that can specifically interfere with
transcriptional elongation, RNA polymerase binding, or transcription factor
binding. This system, which we call CRISPR interference (CRISPRi), can
efficiently repress expression of targeted genes in Escherichia coli, with no
detectable off-target effects. CRISPRi can be used to repress multiple target
genes simultaneously, and its effects are reversible. We also show evidence
that the system can be adapted for gene repression in mammalian cells. This
RNA-guided DNA recognition platform provides a simple approach for selectively
perturbing gene expression on a genome-wide scale.

5\. [casot database](http://eendb.zfgenetics.org/casot/)

6\. [Multiplex Genome Engineering Using CRISPR/Cas
Systems](https://www.sciencemag.org/content/339/6121/819)

