---
title: 'CRISPR-Cas: evolution of an RNA-based adaptive immunity system in prokaryotes'
categories:
- chem
---
E. V. Koonin was the first to suggest in 2005 that the CRISPR repeat sequences
were related to immunity. Therefore, [his recent paper
(2013)](http://europepmc.org/abstract/MED/23439366) is likely to be
informative.
<!--more-->

> The CRISPR-Cas (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats,
CRISPR-associated genes) is an adaptive immunity system in bacteria and
archaea that functions via a distinct self-non-self recognition mechanism that
is partially analogous to the mechanism of eukaryotic RNA interference (RNAi).
The CRISPR-Cas system incorporates fragments of virus or plasmid DNA into the
CRISPR repeat cassettes and employs the processed transcripts of these spacers
as guide RNAs to cleave the cognate foreign DNA or RNA. The Cas proteins,
however, are not homologous to the proteins involved in RNAi and comprise
numerous, highly diverged families. The majority of the Cas proteins contain
diverse variants of the RNA recognition motif (RRM), a widespread RNA-binding
domain. Despite the fast evolution that is typical of the cas genes, the
presence of diverse versions of the RRM in most Cas proteins provides for a
simple scenario for the evolution of the three distinct types of CRISPR-cas
systems. In addition to several proteins that are directly implicated in the
immune response, the cas genes encode a variety of proteins that are
homologous to prokaryotic toxins that typically possess nuclease activity. The
predicted toxins associated with CRISPR-Cas systems include the essential Cas2
protein, proteins of COG1517 that, in addition to a ligand-binding domain and
a helix-turn-helix domain, typically contain different nuclease domains and
several other predicted nucleases. The tight association of the CRISPR-Cas
immunity systems with predicted toxins that, upon activation, would induce
dormancy or cell death suggests that adaptive immunity and dormancy/suicide
response are functionally coupled. Such coupling could manifest in the
persistence state being induced and potentially providing conditions for more
effective action of the immune system or in cell death being triggered when
immunity fails.

