---
title: T. Ryan Gregory Starts 'Evolution Consulting Service' after Reading Gibbon
  Paper in Nature
categories:
- ncRNA
---
T. Ryan Gregory, [who had been fighting ENCODE's junk science since
2007](http://www.genomicron.evolverzone.com/2007/04/onion-test/), is fed up
with another high-profile paper published in Nature. He wrote in Twitter -
<!--more-->

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2014/09/Capture8-300x104.png)

![Capture2](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2014/09/Capture22-300x132.png)

The paper in question has over seventy authors, which tends to scare us these
days. More authors mean higher chance of ['faddish
stuff'](http://www.fasebj.org/content/27/1/1.full) or ['fashionable
ideas'](http://www.fasebj.org/content/22/12/4033.full) getting promoted to the
abstract, and higher risk of being humiliated by Dan Graur sooner or later.

[Gibbon genome and the fast karyotype evolution of small
apes](http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v513/n7517/full/nature13679.html)

> Gibbons are small arboreal apes that display an accelerated rate of
evolutionary chromosomal rearrangement and occupy a key node in the primate
phylogeny between Old World monkeys and great apes. Here we present the
assembly and analysis of a northern white-cheeked gibbon (Nomascus leucogenys)
genome. We describe the propensity for a gibbon-specific retrotransposon
(LAVA) to insert into chromosome segregation genes and alter transcription by
providing a premature termination site, suggesting a possible molecular
mechanism for the genome plasticity of the gibbon lineage. We further show
that the gibbon genera (Nomascus, Hylobates, Hoolock and Symphalangus)
experienced a near-instantaneous radiation ~5 million years ago, coincident
with major geographical changes in southeast Asia that caused cycles of
habitat compression and expansion. Finally, we identify signatures of positive
selection in genes important for forelimb development (TBX5) and connective
tissues (COL1A1) that may have been involved in the adaptation of gibbons to
their arboreal habitat.

We asked Ryan by email, what he saw wrong in the paper and he was kind enough
to explain. Ken Weiss and co-authors often touch on similar flaws in
evolutionary thinking in [their interesting
blog](http://ecodevoevo.blogspot.com/).

> It's just very basic "tree thinking", or correctly interpreting a phylogeny.
In the case of the gibbon paper, they start off with the following statement:

"In the primate phylogeny, gibbons diverged between Old World monkeys and
great apes, providing a unique perspective from which to study the origins of
hominoid characteristics."

This is nonsensical. If you look at a phylogeny of primates, the Old World
monkeys are the outgroup to the clade that includes gibbons and great apes.
This means: a) any member of that clade is equally closely related to Old
World monkeys -- gibbons are not closer than humans are to Old World monkeys,
b) both the great apes and gibbons are descended from a common ancestor that
is not shared by Old World monkeys -- it is therefore equally (in)accurate to
say that great apes diverged between Old world monkeys and gibbons. Also,
these are all modern species. The fact that gibbons are the outgroup to great
apes absolutely does not imply that they are similar to the ancestor of the
entire clade. Early branching does not equal primitive.

If you are not willing to pay for the measly sum Ryan is charging, he offers a
free DIY solution - to read his 2008 paper.

[Understanding Evolutionary
Trees](http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs12052-008-0035-x)

> Charles Darwin sketched his first evolutionary tree in 1837, and trees have
remained a central metaphor in evolutionary biology up to the present. Today,
phylogenetics, the science of constructing and evaluating hypotheses about
historical patterns of descent in the form of evolutionary trees - has become
pervasive within and increasingly outside evolutionary biology. Fostering
skills in tree thinking is therefore a critical component of biological
education. Conversely, misconceptions about evolutionary trees can be very
detrimental to one s understanding of the patterns and processes that have
occurred in the history of life. This paper provides a basic introduction to
evolutionary trees, including some guidelines for how and how not to read
them. Ten of the most common misconceptions about evolutionary trees and their
implications for understanding evolution are addressed.

