---
title: Prediction is very Difficult, Especially if it's about the Future
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
UK's Independent in 2000 -
<!--more-->

[Snowfalls are now just a thing of the
past](http://www.independent.co.uk/environment/snowfalls-are-now-just-a-thing-
of-the-past-724017.html)

> Britain's winter ends tomorrow with further indications of a striking
environmental change: snow is starting to disappear from our lives.

Sledges, snowmen, snowballs and the excitement of waking to find that the
stuff has settled outside are all a rapidly diminishing part of Britain's
culture, as warmer winters - which scientists are attributing to global
climate change - produce not only fewer white Christmases, but fewer white
Januaries and Februaries.

The first two months of 2000 were virtually free of significant snowfall in
much of lowland Britain, and December brought only moderate snowfall in the
South-east. It is the continuation of a trend that has been increasingly
visible in the past 15 years: in the south of England, for instance, from 1970
to 1995 snow and sleet fell for an average of 3.7 days, while from 1988 to
1995 the average was 0.7 days. London's last substantial snowfall was in
February 1991.

Global warming, the heating of the atmosphere by increased amounts of
industrial gases, is now accepted as a reality by the international community.
Average temperatures in Britain were nearly 0.6C higher in the Nineties than
in 1960-90, and it is estimated that they will increase by 0.2C every decade
over the coming century. Eight of the 10 hottest years on record occurred in
the Nineties.

However, the warming is so far manifesting itself more in winters which are
less cold than in much hotter summers. According to Dr David Viner, a senior
research scientist at the climatic research unit (CRU) of the University of
East Anglia,within a few years winter snowfall will become "a very rare and
exciting event".

"Children just aren't going to know what snow is," he said.

The effects of snow-free winter in Britain are already becoming apparent. This
year, for the first time ever, Hamleys, Britain's biggest toyshop, had no
sledges on display in its Regent Street store. "It was a bit of a first," a
spokesperson said.

Fen skating, once a popular sport on the fields of East Anglia, now takes
place on indoor artificial rinks. Malcolm Robinson, of the Fenland Indoor
Speed Skating Club in Peterborough, says they have not skated outside since
1997. "As a boy, I can remember being on ice most winters. Now it's few and
far between," he said.

Michael Jeacock, a Cambridgeshire local historian, added that a generation was
growing up "without experiencing one of the greatest joys and privileges of
living in this part of the world - open-air skating".

Warmer winters have significant environmental and economic implications, and a
wide range of research indicates that pests and plant diseases, usually killed
back by sharp frosts, are likely to flourish. But very little research has
been done on the cultural implications of climate change - into the
possibility, for example, that our notion of Christmas might have to shift.

Professor Jarich Oosten, an anthropologist at the University of Leiden in the
Netherlands, says that even if we no longer see snow, it will remain
culturally important.

"We don't really have wolves in Europe any more, but they are still an
important part of our culture and everyone knows what they look like," he
said.

David Parker, at the Hadley Centre for Climate Prediction and Research in
Berkshire, says ultimately, British children could have only virtual
experience of snow. Via the internet, they might wonder at polar scenes - or
eventually "feel" virtual cold.

Heavy snow will return occasionally, says Dr Viner, but when it does we will
be unprepared. "We're really going to get caught out. Snow will probably cause
chaos in 20 years time," he said.

The chances are certainly now stacked against the sortof heavy snowfall in
cities that inspired Impressionist painters, such as Sisley, and the 19th
century poet laureate Robert Bridges, who wrote in "London Snow" of it,
"stealthily and perpetually settling and loosely lying".

Not any more, it seems.

Fast forward to 2014 -

[Winter 2014 set to be 'coldest for century' Britain faces ARCTIC FREEZE in
just weeks](http://www.express.co.uk/news/nature/520672/Winter-weather-2014
-UK-forecast-cold-snow-November)

Meanwhile in US -

![20141117_PV2_0_0](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2014/11/20141117_PV2_0_0-300x168.jpg)

