---
title: Peanut Genome Released
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
![](http://peanutbase.org/sites/all/themes/peanutbase/images/peanutbase_logo.p
ng)
<!--more-->

We received [a press release](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/press-
release/2014/04/02/the-first-peanut-genomes-sequenced/) about "the first
peanut genomes sequenced". The sequencing was done by International Peanut
Genome Initiative in collaboration with BGI, and they are releasing two
genomes to the public at [this peanutbase
website](http://peanutbase.org/home). You can access the full press release
with all contact information [here](http://homolog.us/download/peanut.pdf),
but the following part is interesting for researchers curious about peanut
science. Plant polyploidy is a fascinating topic and it surely adds complexity
to the assembly process.

>

The peanut grown in fields today is the result of a natural cross between two
wild species, Arachis duranensis and Arachis ipaensis that occurred in the
north of Argentina between 4,000 and 6,000 years ago. Because its ancestors
were two different species, todays peanut is a tetraploid, meaning the species
carries two separate genomes which are designated A and B sub-genomes.

To map the peanuts genome structure, IPGI researchers sequenced the two
ancestral parents, because together they represent the cultivated peanut. The
sequences provide researchers access to 96 percent of all peanut genes in
their genomic context, providing the molecular map needed to more quickly
breed drought-resistant, disease-resistant, lower-input and higher-yielding
varieties. The two ancestor wild species were collected from nature decades
ago. One of the ancestral species, A. duranensis, is widespread but the other,
A. ipaensis, has only ever been collected from one location, and indeed may
now be extinct in the wild. When grappling with the thorny problem of how to
understand peanuts complex genome, it was clear that the genomes of the two
ancestor species would provide excellent models for the genome of the
cultivated peanut: A. duranenis serving as a model for the A sub-genome of the
cultivated peanut and A. ipaensis serving as a model for the B sub-genome.
Fortunately because of the long-sighted efforts of germplasm collection and
conservation, both species were available for study and use by the IPGI.

We further looked for plant phylogeny to find where peanut is in the big
picture and got warned by wiki - "Despite its name and appearance, the peanut
is not a nut, but rather a legume". Two websites
([plaza](http://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/plaza/) and
[phytozome](http://www.phytozome.net/)) were helpful in that respect.
Borrowing the chart from the plaza website, you should try to fit peanut in
the neighborhood of [Glycine max
(soybean)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soybean). [Bean Phaseolus
vulgaris](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phaseolus_vulgaris) is other relevant
organism in this context.

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/Capture-
300x195.png)

There is very interesting evolutionary history that goes with [peanuts and
other legumes](http://www.anbg.gov.au/cpbr/cd-
keys/peakey/key/The%20Pea%20Key/Media/Html/about_peas.html).

> The first definitive legumes appear in the fossil record during the Late
Paleocene (about 56 Myr ago) and all three traditionally recognized
subfamilies of legumes, the caesalpinioids, mimosoids, and papilionoids appear
soon afterward, beginning around 50-55 Ma (Lavin et al., 2005).

Well, [the earliest fossil record of
primates](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_evolution#cite_note-2) came from
the same time - 55 million years ago. So, possibly it is not a surprise that -

> Many Faboideae species are important to humans and include a number of our
basic food and fodder plants such as soybeans, garden peas, broad beans,
clover and lucerne. Their food value results from high levels of nutrients,
especially protein, contained in many species. Most Faboideae have a symbiotic
association with bacteria, Rhizobium, which form nodules on the roots. These
nodules fix atmospheric nitrogen into a form that is available to plants,
making Faboideae important members of both agricultural and ecological
communities. Some species (e.g.clovers, medics and lucerne) are grown as cover
crops or green manures, to enrich the soil.

Needless to say, genome is only the first step in understanding the complex
biology of any organism. We googled 'peanut genetics' and found a grand total
of two papers on the front page !! That means a lot remain to be learned about
this organism.

[Peanut gene expression profiling in developing seeds at different
reproduction stages during Aspergillus parasiticus
infection](http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/8/12)

[Biological Activity of Peanut (Arachis hypogaea) Phytoalexins and Selected
Natural and Synthetic
Stilbenoids](http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/jf104742n)

