---
title: Why are 'Cool Kids' at Github Moving to GO Language?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
These days, when we check for most starred/forked codes at github in various
tags: []
categories, we often see them being written in GO language. Python used to
have the same status 2-3 years back. What changed?
<!--more-->

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/cN_DpYBzKso" frameborder="0"> </iframe>

GO is a new programming language released by Google in 2010. The language has
more going on in addition to the backing by Google. In the programming world,
the [creators of the language](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ken_Thompson) are
more famous than Google.

[The syntax of the code](http://golang.org/) is very similar to C without
strong type-checking, but GO has one advantage over C and python. It is very
easy to write code and run them concurrently into multiple-processor. In that
way, it is similar to Haskell or Erlang (check "[Bye bye Python; Enter
Haskell](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2012/09/26/bye-bye-python-enter-
haskell/)"), but is easier to learn. Writing concurrent code is not easy in
traditional programming languages due to their history of growing in single-
processor era.

Where does GO Stand in the spectrum of languages and tools? The following
benchmarking done by the backers of [yet another concurrent language
(Julia)](http://julialang.org/) explains. Please note that the benchmarks are
biased toward numerical computing, where Julia excels. Moreover, the C,
Fortran and Julia benchmarks were done using
[OpenBLAS](https://github.com/xianyi/OpenBLAS), whereas GO was not. Still you
can see the differences with python, Matlab and R. For a qualitative
comparison of Julia and Go, please check the link at the bottom of the
commentary.

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/Capture-
300x158.png)

Will the python world switch to GO? Here are a few blog posts arguing for and
against such idea.

[Why I went from Python to Go (and not
node.js)](http://jordanorelli.tumblr.com/post/31533769172/why-i-went-from-
python-to-go-and-not-node-js)

> People often ask me why I have decided that Id be writing the bulk of my new
code in Go, which I started programming in November of 2011 while attending
Hacker School. At that time, concurrency was a very hot topic in Hacker
School, and we were all trying out different ways of writing concurrent code.
A bunch of us pitched in and helped out with Brubeck, a framework for doing
concurrency programming with Python, which is probably the least awkward way
of doing concurrency in a Python web application that Ive found. But lets
rewind a little bit, because the context here is exceptionally important to
understand why I chose Go, as it explains why it appeals to me. Ultimately,
your experiences may be very, very different.

[Why Im not leaving Python for Go](http://uberpython.wordpress.com/2012/09/23
/why-im-not-leaving-python-for-go/)

> First of all, Go seems like a great language. It has an excellent tutorial
which I joyfully went through and found:

Go is Fast.

Concurrent by design.

Typed (important for JIT and IDEs) but not cumbersome and ugly like C or C++s
spirals.

Duck-type-esque interfaces.

The defer mechanism is really nifty.

But theres one problem I cant live with. Which is a shame as I was eager to
make the leap of faith in the name of concurrency. That problem is errors are
handled in return values. 70?s style.

[What Python developers need to know before migrating to
Go(lang)](http://blog.repustate.com/migrating-code-from-python-to-golang-what-
you-need-to-know/2013/04/23/)

> This is a (long) blog post about our experience at Repustate in migrating a
big chunk of code from Python/Cython to Go. If you want to read the whole
story, background and all, read on. If youre interested in just what Python
developers need to know before taking the plunge, click the link below.

Tips & tricks in migrating from Python to Go.

The Background

One of the best technological feats that weve done here at Repustate was
implementing Arabic sentiment analysis. Arabic is one tough nut to crack
because of the complex morphological forms Arabic words can take. Tokenization
(splitting a sentence up into individual words) is also tougher in Arabic than
in say, English, because Arabic words can contain whitespace within the word
itself (e.g. the position of aleph within a word). Without giving away our
secret recipe, Repustate uses support vector machines (SVM) to come up with
the most likely meaning behind a sentence and then apply sentiment to that. In
total, we use 22 models (i.e 22 SVMs) and each word in a document is analyzed.
So if you have 500 words in a document, thats more than 10,000 comparisons
against the SVMs.

Python

Repustate is almost entirely a Python shop; we use Django for the API and
website. So it only made sense (at the time) to keep the code base homogenous
and implement all of the Arabic sentiment engine in Python as well. As far as
prototyping and implementing goes, Python is hard to beat. Very expressive,
awesome 3rd party libraries etc. If youre serving up web pages, its perfect.
But when youre doing low level computations, doing lots of comparisons against
hash tables (dictionaries in Python), things get slow. We were able to process
about 2-3 Arabic documents per second, which is too slow. By comparison, our
English language sentiment engine can do about 500 per second.

The Bottleneck

So we fired up the Python profiler and began investigating what was taking so
long. Remember above how I said we have 22 SVMs and each word passes through
it? Well that was all done in serial, not in parallel. OK, our first thought
was to change to this to a map/reduce like operator. TL;DR: The map/reduce
idiom stinks in Python. When you need concurrency, Python is just not your
friend. At PyCon 2013, Guido spoke about Tulip, his new project that was
hoping to remedy this, but thats not due out for a while, and why wait theres
already something better out there.

Golang or go home

My friend at Mozilla told me that Mozilla Services was switching over to Go
for much of their logging infrastructure, in part because of the awesomeness
of goroutines. Go was designed by the folks at Google and it was designed with
concurrency as a first-class notion, not an afterthought, as Pythons various
solutions are. So we went about making the change from Python to Go.

Regarding Julia vs GO:

[Programming Languages: How do Go, Scala and Julia compare with each
other?](http://www.quora.com/Programming-Languages/How-do-Go-Scala-and-Julia-
compare-with-each-other)

> Go is a systems programming language. Google created it to safely solve
three specific problems that C++ was biting them with: concurrency, memory
management and compilation time on large systems. It's concise and readable,
like Scala and Julia, but a bit fussy and low-level, unlike Julia. You would
use it to write safe, well-performing services that your main application
might call to. It would certainly be possible to write scientific software in
Go, much as you would with C or C++, but it doesn't have the same flexibility
and interactivity as, say, Python or Julia, or even Scala. If you're trying to
use Go for data analysis, the fussiness and lack of interactivity will
disappoint you.

Julia is a scientific applications programming language, designed to be a good
replacement for Matlab and Python+SciPy. It's very new, so I won't attempt to
predict which specific features it will or won't pick up, but the underlying
motivations should drive it to be a very good programming language for
scientific software -- not syntactically optimized for statistical operations
on data arrays like R, but good to write a computationally intensive program
that uses multiple CPUs and generates pretty graphics.

