---
title: Did CIA's Fake Polio Vaccination Drive Result in Global Resurgence of an Eradicated
  Disease?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
You cannot make this stuff up !! In 2011, London's Guardian reported about
CIA's fake polio vaccination drive in Pakistan.
<!--more-->

[CIA organised fake vaccination drive to get Osama bin Laden's family
DNA](http://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/11/cia-fake-vaccinations-osama-
bin-ladens-dna)

> The CIA organised a fake vaccination programme in the town where it believed
Osama bin Laden was hiding in an elaborate attempt to obtain DNA from the
fugitive al-Qaida leader's family, a Guardian investigation has found.

As part of extensive preparations for the raid that killed Bin Laden in May,
CIA agents recruited a senior Pakistani doctor to organise the vaccine drive
in Abbottabad, even starting the "project" in a poorer part of town to make it
look more authentic, according to Pakistani and US officials and local
residents.

That led to [widespread suspicion of other public health
programs](http://muslimvillage.com/2014/05/12/53320/the-cia-and-pakistans-
violent-anti-vaccine-insurgency/) not only in Pakistan, but in many other poor
countries. As reported by PBS -

> BROWN: Dr. Anita Zaidi, a pediatrician, cited a fake vaccination campaign
that the CIA used in the hunt for Osama bin Laden.

ZAIDI: Which has hugely damaged public health programs, not only in Pakistan,
but in many, many countries, because people ask all kinds of questions. They
now think that they mightthe vaccine programs might be actually spy
operations.

As a result, previously eradicated Polio is [making a big comeback in many cou
ntries](http://www.democracynow.org/2014/5/12/did_cias_fake_polio_vaccination_
program). Democracynow reports in

**Did CIAs Fake Polio Vaccination Program in Pakistan Help Fuel a Global Health Emergency?**

> Three countries pose the greatest risk of further spreading the paralyzing
virus: Pakistan, Cameroon and Syria. In an unusual step, the WHO recommended
all residents of those countries, of all ages, to be vaccinated before
traveling abroad. The organization also said another seven countries
Afghanistan, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Iraq, Israel, Nigeria and Somalia
should "encourage" all their would-be travelers to get vaccinated. Until
recently, polio had been nearly eradicated thanks to a 25-year campaign that
vaccinated billions of children. In Pakistan, the increase in polio is being
linked to a secret CIA ploy used in the hunt for Osama bin Laden. With the
help of a Pakistani doctor, the CIA set up a fake vaccination campaign in the
city of Abbottabad in an effort to get DNA from the bin Laden family. The
Taliban subsequently announced a ban on immunization efforts and launched a
string of deadly attacks on medical workers.

This proves once again that technology by itself is neither good or bad, and
the use depends on the people and larger society. Most technophiles only
promote the good aspects of cheap sequencing and other technologies, but in
the hands of spooks without control, they can as easily create global health
epidemics.

On the positive side of intended/unintended consequences of global scale -

[Marijuana Legalization Begins to Undermine Drug Cartels](http://www.acting-
man.com/?p=30349)

> For the first time in generations, farmers in central Mexico have stopped
planting marijuana.

Due to ample supplies up north, courtesy of medical and recreational cannabis
legalization, cartel farmers cant make any money off pot anymore, they told
the Washington Post this week. The price for a pound of Mexican marijuana has
plummeted 75 percent from $100 per kilogram to less than $25.

"'Its not worth it anymore,'" said 50 year-old Rodrigo Silla, a lifelong
cannabis farmer. He also told the Post he couldnt remember the last time his
family and others stopped growing mota. 'I wish the Americans would stop with
this legalization.'

For several years we have been writing about how researchers think that
domestic cannabis legalization will seriously hurt Mexican drug cartels who
have murdered something like 60,000 people in the last decade.

We've reported on how California cannabis has cut Mexican cartels out of the
Golden State. That garbage goes east now. Researchers estimate legalization
would cost the cartels billions, and a think tank in Mexico said that
legalization in just one US state would cut cartels out of the US pot
industry. Those days appears to have arrived.

Farmers in the storied Golden Triangle region of Mexicos Sinaloa state, which
has produced the countrys most notorious gangsters and biggest marijuana
harvests, say they are no longer planting the crop. increasingly, theyre
unable to compete with U.S. marijuana growers. With cannabis legalized or
allowed for medical use in 20 U.S. states and the District of Columbia, more
and more of the American market is supplied with highly potent marijuana grown
in American garages and converted warehouses some licensed, others not.
Mexican trafficking groups have also set up vast outdoor plantations on public
land, especially in California, contributing to the fall in marijuana prices.

So now we have both the DEA and cartel farmers both screaming bloody murder
about legalization sounds like we're on the right track.

