---
title: Dan Graur elected as AAAS Fellow, Birney&#47;Gerstein Quietly Drop Out of ENCODE
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Strange things are happening lately !! Dan Graur, who was called troll by
renowned [social media scientists](http://genomebiology.com/2014/15/7/424)
BioMickWatson and Daniel MacArthur, [has been elected AAAS
fellow](http://phys.org/wire-news/178294563/two-university-of-houston-
scientists-elected-as-aaas-fellows.html), whereas ENCODE leaders Ewan Birney
and Mark Gerstein quietly left mouse ENCODE group.
<!--more-->

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2014/11/Capture9-300x107.png)

On that happy note, we share with you an informative paper recently published
by Elhaik and Graur. This paper explains a lot more about the compositional
organization of human and mouse genomes than various ENCODE papers. Several
years back, we read Bernardi's papers and book, and he appeared quite
convincing regarding his isochore theory of genome organization. Here Elhaik
and Graur show that his theory is not supported by facts.

[A Comparative Study and a Phylogenetic Exploration of the Compositional
Architectures of Mammalian Nuclear Genomes](http://www.ploscompbiol.org/articl
e/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pcbi.1003925)

> For the past four decades the compositional organization of the mammalian
genome posed a formidable challenge to molecular evolutionists attempting to
explain it from an evolutionary perspective. Unfortunately, most of the
explanations adhered to the isochore theory, which has long been rebutted.
Recently, an alternative compositional domain model was proposed depicting the
human and cow genomes as composed mostly of short compositionally homogeneous
and nonhomogeneous domains and a few long ones. We test the validity of this
model through a rigorous sequence-based analysis of eleven completely
sequenced mammalian and avian genomes. Seven attributes of compositional
domains are used in the analyses: (1) the number of compositional domains, (2)
compositional domain-length distribution, (3) density of compositional
domains, (4) genome coverage by the different domain types, (5) degree of fit
to a power-law distribution, (6) compositional domain GC content, and (7) the
joint distribution of GC content and length of the different domain types. We
discuss the evolution of these attributes in light of two competing
phylogenetic hypotheses that differ from each other in the validity of clade
Euarchontoglires. If valid, the murid genome compositional organization would
be a derived state and exhibit a high similarity to that of other mammals. If
invalid, the murid genome compositional organization would be closer to an
ancestral state. We demonstrate that the compositional organization of the
murid genome differs from those of primates and laurasiatherians, a phenomenon
previously termed the murid shift, and in many ways resembles the genome of
opossum. We find no support to the isochore theory. Instead, our findings
depict the mammalian genome as a tapestry of mostly short homogeneous and
nonhomogeneous domains and few long ones thus providing strong evidence in
favor of the compositional domain model and seem to invalidate clade
Euarchontoglires.

As you may have expected, good science is rarely sensational.

