---
title: 'A Number of Genetic Tools Developed to Study Choanoflagellates '
categories:
- ncRNA
---
[Here](http://elifesciences.org/content/3/e04070)is an interesting paper on
choanoflagellates from elife, but for an overview check
[here](http://elifesciences.org/content/3/e05218) (h/t: @PlantEvolution).
Choanoflagellates are the unicellular descendants of evolutionary ancestors of
multicellular animals. Therefore, by studying them, we can know about how
multicellularity evolved millions of years back.
<!--more-->

The evolution of multicellularity is a very interesting topic. Apparently
multicellularity evolved many times independently in eukaryotes. For a full
list, check the image in the following post.

[Aggregative Multicellularity and Multicellularity by
Division](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/plant/2014/04/20/aggregative-
multicellularity-and-multicellularity-by-division/)

Nicole King's lab led the genome project and is now developing a number of
genetic tools to study this unicellular eukaryote. Those will be very useful
for researchers trying to understand this organism by doing bench experiments,
because large scale data sets can only tell so much.

> The central question in the field of developmental biology is: how can a
single fertilised egg cell develop into a living organism made of millions of
specialised cells? The evolutionary flip side of this question is: how did a
multicellular animal first evolve from a single-celled microorganism? For
decades evolutionary biologists have tried to answer this question by
analysing the fossil record, by studying the species that represent the
earliest branches in the animal family tree and, lately, by exploring the
closest unicellular relatives of the animal kingdom.

Nevertheless, a persistent problem that has hindered attempts to address this
question has been the limited number of genetic tools available to study the
functions of genes in choanoflagellates. Studies based on transcriptomics and
immunohistochemistry techniques had offered insights regarding the regulation
of gene expression and the localisation of proteins but, unfortunately, such
analyses failed to provide a clear link between gene function and colonial
development. Now in eLife, Nicole King and colleagues at the University of
California, Berkeley, including Tera Levin as the first author, report that
they have solved this problem by performing a genetic screen in S. rosetta
(Levin et al., 2014). This screen has provided the first evidence that links a
genetic change to an observable defect in S. rosetta's development: in other
words, it has linked genotype to phenotype in a choanoflagellate that forms
colonies.

Levin et al. used the classic approach of creating random mutations throughout
the S. rosetta genome, and then isolating mutant lines that were not able to
form colonies (Figure 1). They could reliably select for this phenotype
because S. rosetta can be made to form rosette-like colonies in the laboratory
by adding a molecule, called a sulfunolipid, which is produced by a bacterial
species (Alegado et al., 2012). After screening thousands of mutants, Levin et
al. isolated nine that did not form colonies in the presence of the bacteria,
but that otherwise appeared identical to the wild-type cells.

We have a number of other blog posts on topics related to evolution of
multicellularity -

[Trichoplax adhaerens at the Root of Multicellular Animal
Tree](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/ncrna/2014/03/26/trichoplax-adhaerens/)

[A Good Paper on Hox-TALE
Puzzle](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/ncrna/2014/03/26/a-nice-paper-on-hox-tale-
puzzle/)

[Regulated Aggregative Multicellularity in a Close Unicellular Relative of
Metazoa](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/plant/2014/04/20/regulated-aggregative-
multicellularity-in-a-close-unicellular-relative-of-metazoa/)

