---
title: Our New PNAS Paper Debunks the Genomics of Positivity
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Readers may recall our blog post from last year -
<!--more-->

[Tragedy of the Day: PNAS Got Duped by Positivity Lady
!!](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/08/05/tragedy-of-the-day-pnas-got-
duped-by-positivity-lady/)

[Whiskey Tango Foxtrot Arianna Huffington Embraces PNAS-published Junk Science
of Positivity !!!](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/06/24/whiskey-tango-
foxtrot-arianna-huffington-embraces-pnas-published-junk-science-of-
positivity/)

[UC Berkeley, Lior Pachters University, Offers MOOC Course on Science of
Positivity](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/06/24/uc-berkeley-lior-
pachters-university-offers-mooc-course-on-science-of-positivity/)

That blog post led to a formal paper that just came out in PNAS -

[A critical reanalysis of the relationship between genomics and well-
being](http://www.pnas.org/content/early/2014/08/21/1407057111.abstract)

> Fredrickson et al. [Fredrickson BL, et al. (2013) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
110(33):1368413689] claimed to have observed significant differences in gene
expression related to hedonic and eudaimonic dimensions of well-being. Having
closely examined both their claims and their data, we draw substantially
different conclusions. After identifying some important conceptual and
methodological flaws in their argument, we report the results of a series of
reanalyses of their dataset. We first applied a variety of exploratory and
confirmatory factor analysis techniques to their self-reported well-being
data. A number of plausible factor solutions emerged, but none of these
corresponded to Fredrickson et al.s claimed hedonic and eudaimonic dimensions.
We next examined the regression analyses that purportedly yielded distinct
differential profiles of gene expression associated with the two well-being
dimensions. Using the best-fitting two-factor solution that we identified, we
obtained effects almost twice as large as those found by Fredrickson et al.
using their questionable hedonic and eudaimonic factors. Next, we conducted
regression analyses for all possible two-factor solutions of the psychometric
data; we found that 69.2% of these gave statistically significant results for
both factors, whereas only 0.25% would be expected to do so if the regression
process was really able to identify independent differential gene expression
effects. Finally, we replaced Fredrickson et al.s psychometric data with
random numbers and continued to find very large numbers of apparently
statistically significant effects. We conclude that Fredrickson et al.s widely
publicized claims about the effects of different dimensions of well-being on
health-related gene expression are merely artifacts of dubious analyses and
erroneous methodology.

For a simple explanation of what it is all about, please check the well-
written blog post of our co-author James Coyne -

[Reanalysis: No health benefits found for pursuing meaning in life versus
pleasure](http://blogs.plos.org/mindthebrain/2014/08/25/reanalysis-health-
benefits-found-pursuing-meaning-life-versus-pleasure/)

> Was the original article a matter of science made for press release? Our
article poses issues concerning the gullibility of the scientific community
and journalists regarding claims of breakthrough discoveries from small
studies with provocative, but fuzzy theorizing and complicated methodologies
and statistical analyses that apparently even the authors themselves do not
understand.

1\. Multiple analyses of original data do not find separate factors indicating
striving for pleasure versus purpose

2\. Random number generators yield best predictors of gene expression from the
original data

If you need an even simpler summery, reporter Sharon Begley from Reuters
interviewed our co-author and wrote an article as well.

[Happiness study draws frowns from
critics](http://in.reuters.com/article/2014/08/25/us-science-happiness-
idINKBN0GP1QA20140825)

> More crucially, Brown said, the happiness questionnaire was flawed. People
who scored high on three items meant to identify hedonists scored equally
highly on 11 items meant to identify people who seek eudaimonic well-being.

"The two constructs are essentially measuring the same thing," Brown said, so
putting people in one category rather than another was "meaningless."

Most devastating was what happened when Brown grouped the items randomly,
calling those who scored high on questions 1, 7 and 8 (or any of 8,191 other
combinations) one kind of person and those who scored high on others a second
type.

Even with such meaningless groupings, there were patterns of gene activity
seemingly characteristic of each group.

Statistics professor Andrew Gelman of Columbia University, who was not
involved in either study, called Brown's critique "reasonable."

Flawed statistics have become such a serious problem for journals that many of
the world's top titles are adding extra levels of statistical checks in the
peer-review process. Deputy executive editor Daniel Salsbury said PNAS was not
changing its longstanding practice, which is "to work within our review
process to ensure the work is sound in all aspects."

In a reply to Brown, Frederickson and coauthor Steven Cole of the University
of California, Los Angeles, reject the criticism and say they have replicated
their 2013 findings in a new sample of 122 people.

[Happiness study draws frowns frum
critics](http://www.ozarksentinal.com/2014/08/26/happiness-study-draws-frowns-
from-critics/)

> NEW YORK (Reuters) A high-profile 2013 study at concludet at differnt kinds
o'happiness air associatid wit dramaticallee differnt patterns o'gene
activitee is fatallee flawet, accerdyun' ta un analeesis publishet un Mundie
which tore into its target wit langwage rarelee see n' science journals.

T' new pap'r, publishet like t'furst n' Proceedings o't' Nashshunal Academy
o'Sciences, slams t'reseerch fer dubiyus analeeses an' erroneyus methodology
an' sez it conjuret nonaxistent effecks out o'thin air.

N' t'2013 study, reseerchers had adults anser a 14-item questyunnaire meent ta
sort 'um into acoupla groups: innerested n' hedonic well-bein (fun an' selfish
pleshur) er eudaimonic well-bein (leedyun' a meeningfil life).

We will add all other relevant links as they come along.

