---
title: Seeking Readers' Feedback on Subscription and Redesign
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Dear Readers,
<!--more-->

**Tutorials**

We have been looking for ways to complete [our
tutorials](http://homolog.us/Tutorials/), which were not updated for a while.
The original plan was (and still is) to freely provide state-of-the-art
information on various bioinformatics methods and algorithms in the tutorial
section, so that the students and researchers can use them for their work. It
is possible to learn about the same topics by reading many papers, but that
takes a lot of time. Having all in one place and being explained in simple
language would be helpful for those trying to catch up with this rapidly
advancing field.

Sadly, we got extremely busy with other work over the last year and could not
pay attention to the tutorials. Recently the section is starting to get many
hits and the last thing we want to do is to let others rely on incomplete
information.

We have been thinking about ways to free up some time and start working on the
tutorials. One option is to get a list of paid patrons of our blog. The daily
topics in our blog are free and we like to keep them free always. Therefore,
we were toying with ideas about what additional thing we can offer to the
subscribers in return for their patronage. We must offer something extra,
because nobody (except one person we collaborate closely with) bothered to
press the donate button over the last two years.

One option we are thinking is that we will send a report/newsletter once a
month (around 1st week of each month) to the patrons discussing some advanced
topics, such as a newly release program or paper, in detail. Also, in the
newsletter, we can provide a highlight of topics discussed in our blog during
the month. That way, you do not have to read all of them and can come back and
read the topics that interest you. Any other idea on what would benefit you is
welcome.

![OB-YT773_coffee_G_20130904024204](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2014/03/OB-YT773_coffee_G_20130904024204-300x200.jpg)

We would also like to keep the cost of subscription as low [as a cup of
Starbucks coffee in China](http://blogs.wsj.com/chinarealtime/2013/09/04
/chart-the-price-of-a-grande-latte-in-china/). That way people from all over
the world can benefit from what we write and can contribute to our continued
existence. The original purpose of this blog was to use the internet
technology and spread information around the world. One reason we spend quite
a bit of time to cover conferences and Meetup presentations is that it saves
time and money for people from distant countries, who are interested in
learning about cutting-edge technologies and research without flying across
the world to be at various conferences.

Another option for pricing is to choose a variable model ('minimum
contribution'-'expected contribution') so that everyone can help us at a low
level and some can choose to help at a higher level.

Questions for you -

(i) Do you think it will be helpful to get the tutorials finished and will you
be interested in having a separate subscription option for blog patrons? Any
suggestion about what price is affordable, etc. would be welcome.

(ii) What do you like to get in return for subscription? If it is a monthly
newsletter, what topics interest you?

Once again, our blog will be freely accessible as before, and we have no plan
to even put a registration option.

\------------------------------------------------------------

**Blog redesign**

As you may have noticed, we have also been working on redesigning various
pages of the blog(s). The categories are being streamlined. We also created a
[clean and simplified front page](http://homolog.us/). Please feel free to
provide any other suggestion and we will try to incorporate them.

One question - can you access the pages easily from a mobile device or do you
like to have a more responsive theme?

