---
title: 'Vaccinating with the genome: a Sisyphean task?'
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
[This paper](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19359219) from 2009 is highly
worth reading. It speaks about the difficulties of going from a sequenced
genome to solving real problems (not GWAS), be it finding diseases mechanisms
or developing effective malaria vaccine, as in the case of the linked paper.
Genomes of both the malaria parasite and its mosquito vector were assembled in
2001, but the only vaccines under consideration even today are based on
research done in the early 1990s.
<!--more-->

> Human trials of subunit vaccines against the asexual blood stage of malaria
are yielding disappointing results, supporting the premise that a single
recombinant protein will not be particularly efficacious and that additional
proteins must be added. The genome sequence of Plasmodium falciparum offers a
large number of additional candidates, but which should be chosen? Various
criteria have been suggested to rank the additional candidates, but in the
absence of even a partially effective asexual-stage vaccine, the criteria
remain unvalidated. These issues are discussed here, together with some
suggestions as to how the development of an asexual-stage vaccine could be
progressed.

Why is it so difficult to develop vaccines despite having the sequenced
genome? The researchers realized that genome was only a tiny piece of the
puzzle. It had been extremely difficult to figure out the functions of most
genes, especially in highly AT-rich Plasmodium genome. Even doing experiments
that were routine for model organisms (such as making transgenics) turned out
to be difficult to establish in newly sequenced organisms.

There are two positive developments.

1\. CRISPR/cas9 technology (discussed in detail [in our chemistry
blog](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/chem/)) made it easy to develop transgenics.

2\. The following paper is a potential success story of post-genomic era that
may lead to developing new malaria vaccines in future.

[The blood-stage malaria antigen PfRH5 is susceptible to vaccine-inducible
cross-strain neutralizing
antibody](http://www.nature.com/ncomms/journal/v2/n12/full/ncomms1615.html)

> Current vaccine strategies against the asexual blood stage of Plasmodium
falciparum are mostly focused on well-studied merozoite antigens that induce
immune responses after natural exposure, but have yet to induce robust
protection in any clinical trial. Here we compare human-compatible viral-
vectored vaccines targeting ten different blood-stage antigens. We show that
the full-length P. falciparum reticulocyte-binding protein homologue 5 (PfRH5)
is highly susceptible to cross-strain neutralizing vaccine-induced antibodies,
out-performing all other antigens delivered by the same vaccine platform. We
find that, despite being susceptible to antibody, PfRH5 is unlikely to be
under substantial immune selection pressure; there is minimal acquisition of
anti-PfRH5 IgG antibodies in malaria-exposed Kenyans. These data challenge the
widespread beliefs that any merozoite antigen that is highly susceptible to
immune attack would be subject to significant levels of antigenic
polymorphism, and that erythrocyte invasion by P. falciparum is a degenerate
process involving a series of parallel redundant pathways.

