---
title: Google's 'Censorship Engine' Makes Guardian Articles Disappear
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
When we first pointed out the role of Google in potential censorship eighteen
months back (check "[Google Censorship: Scariest Thing for Academic
Freedom](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/05/13/google-censorship-
scariest-thing-for-academic-freedom/)"), everyone argued that nothing like
that could happen. A few months later, bioinformatician C. Titus Brown called
us ['insanely ignorant of internet
realities'](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/06/10/titus-brown-offers-
new-class-on-internet-realities/) for re-expressing similar views. These days,
slowly but surely everyone is realizing the power of Google in shaping the
past and future.
<!--more-->

A recent ruling by EU court establishes a new fundamental right -['right to be
forgotten'](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Right_to_be_forgotten). Within the
first four hours of establishment of this new ruling, 40,000 censorship
requests came to Google and they took action. One of the results is the
following, [as pointed out by Guardian and
Mish](http://globaleconomicanalysis.blogspot.com/2014/07/big-brothers-right-
to-censorship-and.html) \-

> [Following] a European court ruling that individuals had the right to remove
material about themselves from search engine results, arrived in the
Guardian's inbox this morning, in the form of an automated notification that
six Guardian articles have been scrubbed from search results.

Three of the articles, dating from 2010, relate to a now-retired Scottish
Premier League referee, Dougie McDonald, who was found to have lied about his
reasons for granting a penalty in a Celtic v Dundee United match, the backlash
to which prompted his resignation.

Anyone entering the fairly obvious search term "Dougie McDonald Guardian" into
google.com the US version of Google will see three Guardian articles about the
incident as their first results. Type the exact same phrase into Google.co.uk,
however, and the articles have vanished entirely. McDonald's record is swept
clean.

The Guardian has no form of appeal against parts of its journalism being made
all but impossible for most of Europe's 368 million to find. The strange
aspect of the ruling is all the content is still there: if you click the links
in this article, you can read all the "disappeared" stories on this site. No
one has suggested the stories weren't true, fair or accurate. But still they
are made hard for anyone to find.

There might be a case for saying some stories should vanish from the archives:
what about, say, someone who committed a petty crime at 18, who long since
reformed and cleaned up their act? If at the age of 30 they're finding that
their search history is still preventing them getting a job, couldn't they
make the case that it's time for their record to be forgotten? Perhaps it's a
matter of debate. But such editorial calls surely belong with publishers, not
Google.

The Guardian, like the rest of the media, regularly writes about things people
have done which might not be illegal but raise serious political, moral or
ethical questions tax avoidance, for example. These should not be allowed to
disappear: to do so is a huge, if indirect, challenge to press freedom. The
ruling has created a stopwatch on free expression our journalism can be found
only until someone asks for it to be hidden.

Publishers can and should do more to fight back. One route may be legal
action. Others may be looking for search tools and engines outside the EU.
Quicker than that is a direct innovation: how about any time a news outlet
gets a notification, it tweets a link to the article that's just been
disappeared. Would you follow @GdnVanished?

If the internet searches are politicized, that is equivalent to censorship.
Will the same search keywords now yield widely different results in every
country, depending on the political preferences of the government or the
oligarchs?

Others are also discovering the monopoly power of Google in affecting their
existence. For example, leading social and financial blog NakedCapitalism
complained -

[Google Algorithm Change Whacks Naked
Capitalism](http://www.nakedcapitalism.com/2014/06/google-algorithm-change-
whacks-naked-capitalism.html)

> Naked Capitalism is on the receiving end of a nasty bit of synchronicity.
Readers may recall that we wrote last week about the role that monopolies and
oligopolies play in reducing competitiveness and promoting inequality.
Oligopolies and monopolies are a classic example of rent extraction, where the
incumbents can distort pricing due to their outsized position. The end result
is less competitive products (dominant players dont need to reinvest since
their customers lack good options) and a transfer from customers to providers.
We discussed a few examples of monopolists and oligopolists, but one we
neglected to mention was Google.

