---
title: UC Berkeley, Lior Pachter's University, Offers MOOC Course on 'Science' of
  Positivity
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
[In a recent blog post](http://liorpachter.wordpress.com/2014/05/25/bessels-
correction-and-the-dangers-of-moocs/), Berkeley researcher Lior Pachter
explained why he was negative about offering MOOC courses. Here is a 'science-
backed' MOOC course from his university [that may change his
mind](https://www.edx.org/course/uc-berkeleyx/uc-berkeleyx-gg101x-science-
happiness-1497#.U6mmp9LNn0t), unless he is reading [other 'scientific'
material from Arianna Huffington's
book](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/06/24/whiskey-tango-foxtrot-
arianna-huffington-embraces-pnas-published-junk-science-of-positivity/).
<!--more-->

> The first MOOC to teach positive psychology. Learn science-based principles
and practices for a happy, meaningful life.

**About this Course**

We all want to be happy, and there are countless ideas about what happiness is
and how we can get some. But not many of those ideas are based on science.
Thats where this course comes in.

The Science of Happiness is the first MOOC to teach the ground-breaking
science of positive psychology, which explores the roots of a happy and
meaningful life. Students will engage with some of the most provocative and
practical lessons from this science, discovering how cutting-edge research can
be applied to their own lives. Created by UC Berkeleys Greater Good Science
Center, the course will zero in on a fundamental finding from positive
psychology: that happiness is inextricably linked to having strong social
connections and contributing to something bigger than yourselfthe greater
good. Students will learn about the cross-disciplinary research supporting
this view, spanning the fields of psychology, neuroscience, evolutionary
biology, and beyond.

and look who will make a special appearance on the show? The positivity lady
!!

> The courses co-instructors, Dacher Keltner and Emiliana Simon-Thomas, are
not only leading authorities on positive psychology but also gifted teachers
skilled at making science feel fun and personal. Theyll be joined by world-
renowned experts discussing themes like empathy, mindfulness, and
gratitudeexperts including Rick Hanson, **Barbara Fredrickson**, Paul Ekman,
Sonja Lyubomirsky, and Jon Kabat-Zinn. Health professionals who register can
earn continuing education units for their participation.

