---
title: Finally Some Honest Reporting of GWAS for a Change
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Kudos to Leroy Hood, Stuart Kim and colleagues for not publishing yet another
hyped up GWAS study.
<!--more-->

[Whole-Genome Sequencing of the Worlds Oldest People](http://www.plosone.org/a
rticle/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0112430)

> Supercentenarians (110 years or older) are the worlds oldest people. Seventy
four are alive worldwide, with twenty two in the United States. We performed
whole-genome sequencing on 17 supercentenarians to explore the genetic basis
underlying extreme human longevity. We found no significant evidence of
enrichment for a single rare protein-altering variant or for a gene harboring
different rare protein altering variants in supercentenarian compared to
control genomes.

Here is what being honest gets you - being ridiculed by a busy Berkeley math
professor, who could not look up the rest of the abstract.

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2014/11/Capture7-300x73.png)

The authors of GWAS study indeed tried to follow up with their best hit on
another 99 long-lived individuals.

> We followed up on the gene most enriched for rare protein-altering variants
in our cohort of supercentenarians, TSHZ3, by sequencing it in a second cohort
of 99 long-lived individuals but did not find a significant enrichment.

The following part of the abstract rings death knell to the nascent industry
trying to predict future diseases of healthy people by from their genomes.

> The genome of one supercentenarian had a pathogenic mutation in DSC2, known
to predispose to arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy, which is
recommended to be reported to this individual as an incidental finding
according to a recent position statement by the American College of Medical
Genetics and Genomics. Even with this pathogenic mutation, the proband lived
to over 110 years. The entire list of rare protein-altering variants and DNA
sequence of all 17 supercentenarian genomes is available as a resource to
assist the discovery of the genetic basis of extreme longevity in future
studies.

