---
title: Sydney Brenner's "Lawsuit against Editors and Publishers of Nascence"
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
A recent interview ([How Academia and Publishing are Destroying Scientific
Innovation: A Conversation with Sydney
Brenner](http://kingsreview.co.uk/magazine/blog/2014/02/24/how-academia-and-
publishing-are-destroying-scientific-innovation-a-conversation-with-sydney-
brenner/)) of Sydney Brenner is going around. It contains a link to a witty
and allegorical article he wrote in Current Biology 1996 complaining against
'Nascence' that the readers might enjoy.
<!--more-->

[Hard Cases

> The plaintiffs claim that by not being able to publish in Nascence, they
have suffered injury to their professional careers and are claiming
compensatory damages. It can be argued that this is the fate of many
scientists and that their claims should be rejected just as their paper was,
but we intend to establish that the plaintiffs were wrongfully excluded, that
they were unable to confront the negative referee directly and that the Editor
was negligent in not checking the validity of this referees statements. Even
though the Editors will claim that many factors were taken into consideration
in their rejection, it is a fair implication that it was the negative comments
of one referee that turned the balance.

Your Lordship may find it surprising that, in a profession that prides itself
on the objectivity and rigour of scientific argument, individuals are allowed
to make ex cathedra statements without any direct support and that the
journals believe that they need to preserve the anonymity of such
commentators. Their names have now been provided by the defendants on pain of
imprisonment, since your Lordships ruling that failure to do so would be
viewed as contempt of court.

We intend to prove by cross examining the referee that the statements had no
justification. We also will show that the Editor, although possessing an
academic qualification of some relevance, was essentially a lay person in this

specialised field and should have sought additional opinion rather than giving
undue weight to a negative view, not once but twice.

Kudos to Brenner for realizing the problems about twenty years back. Here are
[his thoughts on peer
review](http://kingsreview.co.uk/magazine/blog/2014/02/24/how-academia-and-
publishing-are-destroying-scientific-innovation-a-conversation-with-sydney-
brenner/). We agree with almost everything he said here and in the rest of the
interview.

> I think peer review is hindering science. In fact, I think it has become a
completely corrupt system. Its corrupt in many ways, in that scientists and
academics have handed over to the editors of these journals the ability to
make judgment on science and scientists. There are universities in America,
and Ive heard from many committees, that we wont consider peoples publications
in low impact factor journals.

Now I mean, people are trying to do something, but I think its not publish or
perish, its publish in the okay places [or perish]. And this has assembled a
most ridiculous group of people. I wrote a column for many years in the
nineties, in a journal called Current Biology. In one article, Hard Cases, I
campaigned against this [culture] because I think it is not only bad, its
corrupt. In other words it puts the judgment in the hands of people who really
have no reason to exercise judgment at all. And thats all been done in the aid
of commerce, because they are now giant organisations making money out of it.

Elsewhere, Brenner gave away the secret formula for developing creativity :)

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/IuqfGmk9BII" frameborder="0"> </iframe>
