---
title: Taiwanese Nanotech Paper Heading for Retraction, Professor&#47;Student Punished
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
When we wrote about a controversial Nanopore paper last year (see [Nanopore
Sequencing by Divine
Intervention?](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/05/16/nanopore-
sequencing-by-divine-intervention/)), we expected the authors to either
receive multiple Nobel prizes or get elevated to the status of deity. The
second option seemed more likely after additional details came out about the
project (see [Bizarro Details Coming out on Nanopore Sequencing by Divine
Intervention Story](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/11/06/bizarro-
details-coming-out-on-nanopore-sequencing-by-divine-intervention-story/)).
Apparently the 'lab', where those cutting-edge experiments were done, did not
have any suitable equipment and was located far from the university near a
well-known temple.
<!--more-->

National Chiao Tung University, whose motto is ???? ???? ("Learn New Knowledge
and Reach Far; Honor the Truth and Work Hard"), did not appreciate being a
laughing stock any more and pulled the plug on this project. Those, who
understand Chinese, can check about this latest development at [this
link](http://www.stormmediagroup.com/opencms/news/detail/c2845cdd-8201-11e4
-b7fe-ef2804cba5a1/?uuid=c2845cdd-8201-11e4-b7fe-ef2804cba5a1). The jumbled up
text from google translate text is not worth reproducing and the picture makes
one think the professor/student got some big reward, not kicked out of the
university.

![110574wewyeimages6-](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2014/12/110574wewyeimages6--300x199.jpg)

This is a terrible tragedy for our blog, because we will have to restrict
ourselves with making fun of domestic clowns, such as the [ENCODE
leaders](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/04/09/is-it-time-to-get-the-
encode-paper-retracted/) and the [positivity
lady](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/08/05/tragedy-of-the-day-pnas-got-
duped-by-positivity-lady/).

