---
title: ENCODE Backers Want US to Retract Commentary, Should We?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Dear Readers,
<!--more-->

A number of ENCODE-backers are aghast and requesting us to [take down a
previous commentary](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/04/23/how-
lucrative-is-encode-here-is-a-good-example/) (see tweets at the bottom). What
do you suggest? We will explain our rationale for reporting and would like to
hear what you think.

We believe we are following the standard journalistic procedures. Here is
["Chapter 62: Privacy and public
interest"](http://www.thenewsmanual.net/Manuals%20Volume%203/volume3_62.htm)
discussing journalistic standards about reporting of 'private life' by news
sources.

In our opinion,

i) ENCODE is a gigantic publicly funded project and therefore its leaders are
subject to public scrutiny.

ii) Moreover, ENCODE jumped across the 'scientific argument' barrier by
manipulating media in its press releases. Not only that, their press releases
were deliberate lies ([defined based on journalistic rules](http://www.thenews
manual.net/Manuals%20Volume%203/volume3_56.htm#lies)), if the latest PNAS
paper is any guide. Therefore, they should be treated based on journalistic
standards and not based on 'let us keep the discussion to science' standards.
There should be a cost for using misleading press releases in order to gain
public funds, which is what ENCODE did.

Back to the chapter on journalism -

> In this chapter, we look at the relationship between a person's right to
privacy and the public's right to know about that person's life. We discuss
what it means to be a public figure and what rights journalist have to examine
their lives and the lives of their families. We conclude by examining the
rights of people to grieve in private.

The readers are encouraged to go through the detailed discussions in the
chapter about what a journalist should and should not report about private
lives of public figures. Let us mention the summary and a few relevant
paragraphs.

**

TO SUMMARISE:

You have a right to report on the public life of public figures

You can report on the private life of public figures if

it tells something about their character which might affect their public duty

they are responsible for public assets

their private misdeeds could affect the public good

You have no right to intrude on a person's private life where there is no
public benefit**

From another section -

>

**Public figures**

How far can you probe into a person's private life to get news? This is most
easily answered where the individuals are public figures, especially where
they are people who have put themselves forward for public positions of trust.
We are talking here particularly about people like politicians, group leaders,
clergymen and all those people whose personalities and private morality are
essential parts of their work.

You must make a distinction between those people who have voluntarily entered
the public arena and those who are forced into it by circumstances they could
not reasonably have expected. For example, a businessman who holds a press
conference to announce some new money-making project is seeking public
attention; the airline hostess who suddenly discovers she has contracted a
rare tropical disease has simply been thrust into the news against her will.

You could justify probing into both the public and private finances of the
businessman. You cannot justify digging up scandalous details of the flight
attendant's private life where it does not have any relevance to the story of
the disease.

There is also the question of who is a public figure. Most journalists would
accept that it is their duty to examine the whole life of someone like the
President of the United States in detail because he put himself forward to be
President. His press secretary acts as the President's mouthpiece on many
public issues and is expected to reflect the President's thinking. Is the
press secretary a public figure? Would journalists be justified in publishing
stories about his affair with an office cleaner?

The answer to the first question is that maybe he is a public figure. The
answer to the second question is probably "No", we should not write about his
affair with the office cleaner - unless he was giving the cleaner government
secrets in bed, and she was passing them on to an enemy. Or if there was a
chance that he could be blackmailed into betraying his public trust because of
the affair.

From elsewhere in the same document -

> Private morality can tell us something about the person's character, and how
it could affect their professional performance. If, in his private life, a
public figure is found to have lied in a serious way, the public should be
made aware that he could be lying in his work, too. Where public figures are
responsible for setting a moral tone in society, any private immorality should
be exposed as hypocrisy. For example, society should be aware that a leading
campaigner against child abuse regularly beats his own children.

and the most important part -

> The media should constantly examine the lives of public figures with
responsibility for public funds and other assets. Politicians who have the
power to influence the awarding of contracts should accept that their private
friendships with business people should be open to public view. After all, it
is taxpayers' money they could be giving away illegally. Politicians can
promise voters that their friendships will never influence them in public
office. As a journalist, you should monitor whether they keep that promise.

Does the public have a right to know about private lives of a scientist, who
is on several NHGRI advisory panels, who is being accused of fraud by a
reputed Berkeley professor AND **who used media to send out misleading
information about his research**?

Should the scientists expect the journalists to apply only those rules, which
work in their favor irrespective of the actions of scientists?

If these scientists are so morally upright, why are they not applying their
scientific standards to ask ENCODE to retract its Nature paper or to ask
Kellis to retract his [Nature Biotech paper being discussed on by
Bray/Pachter](http://liorpachter.wordpress.com/2014/02/11/the-network-
nonsense-of-manolis-kellis/)?

[Is It Time to Get the ENCODE Paper
Retracted?](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/04/09/is-it-time-to-get-the-
encode-paper-retracted/)

Update.

**Based on everyone's request, we removed the commentary from our blog. It is distracting us from other scientific topics we like to cover. Everything we posted were from public domain and we do not have to reproduce them here to make a point. We hope these people go against the 80% functionality claim in the media with the same zeal.**

\-----------------------------------------------------------

![Capture2](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2014/04/Capture23-300x98.png)

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2014/04/Capture19-300x50.png)

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2014/04/Capture20-300x51.png)

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2014/04/Capture25-300x149.png)

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2014/04/Capture26-300x46.png)

