---
title: On the Mythology of Natural Selection
categories:
- ncRNA
---
Evolutionary (adaptationist) explanations often do not follow any scientific
principle and can be as hard to invalidate as religious explanation. For
example, in a commentary in Science magazine titled [How bird flocks are like
liquid helium](http://news.sciencemag.org/math/2014/07/how-bird-flocks-are-
liquid-helium), we read -
<!--more-->

> The new model also predicts that information travels faster if the flock is
well aligned, something else the team observed, Cavagna says. Other models do
not predict or explain that relationship. "This could be the evolutionary
drive to have an ordered flock," he says, because the birds would be able to
maneuver more rapidly and elude potential predators, among other things.

The rest of the article did not have any supporting evidence to justify that
evolutionary explanation and the writer could replace it with 'this could be
the gravitation acting to have an ordered flock' or 'this could be
distribution of solar energy acting to have an ordered flock' or 'this could
be the God's wish to have an ordered flock' with no difference to the
argument. However, mentioning 'evolution' appears to be more scientific to the
audience of Science, and writer chose that way. But is that science?

Ken Weiss wrote an wonderful series on the flaws of invoking Darwin everywhere
that we encourage our readers to take a look at. It explains when invoking
'natural selection' is scientific vs when it is used as a dogma. Links to the
entire series are posted below.

> Natural Selection is a deep insight, but it's not the only explanation

However, this is all very well known. Even if chance plays some role, we do
indeed need to have a mechanistic explanation for the origin of complex traits
in organisms, like the fingers I'm using to type this message, the eyes that
watch what I'm doing, and the brain that (hopefully) introduces some sense
into it.

Natural selection has become entrenched essentially as dogma, applied to
everything and uncritically when cogent specific explanations aren't supported
by much more than the author's say-so. That's why adaptation 'explanations'
are widely known as Just-So stories, because they, too, verge on tautology--
they're plausible and could be true and are appealing and can't be refuted so
they're assumed to be true as actual explanations. Most biologists, and
especially others such as anthropologists and even the preponderance of the
biomedical research community, not to mention the popular science press, seem
to cling to natural selection as the one and only explanation, and of course
as the first, middle, and last defense against creationist explanations. But
that's wrong.

It is in this sense that the deep insight of an explanation for organized
traits becomes mythology. What seems to be far less known and even farther
less acknowledged is that there are a diversity of other ways, other wholly
material means, by which complex traits can arise than by natural selection.
In this series, we'll explore them, beginning next time with natural selection
itself.

[On the mythology of natural selection. Part I:
Introduction](http://ecodevoevo.blogspot.com/2014/07/on-mythology-of-natural-
selection-part.html)

[On the mythology of natural selection. Part II: Classical
Darwinism](http://ecodevoevo.blogspot.com/2014/07/on-mythology-of-natural-
selection-part_16.html)

[On the mythology of natural selection: Part III. Organismal
selection](http://ecodevoevo.blogspot.com/2014/07/on-mythology-of-natural-
selection-part_17.html)

[On the mythology of natural selection: Part IV. Functional
selection](http://ecodevoevo.blogspot.com/2014/07/on-mythology-of-natural-
selection-part_18.html)

[On the mythology of natural selection: Part V. Niche
construction](http://ecodevoevo.blogspot.com/2014/07/on-mythology-of-natural-
selection-part_21.html)

[On the mythology of natural selection: Part VI. Sexual and Group
selection](http://ecodevoevo.blogspot.com/2014/07/on-mythology-of-natural-
selection-part_22.html)

[On the mythology of natural selection: Part VII. Phenogenetic
drift](http://ecodevoevo.blogspot.com/2014/07/on-mythology-of-natural-
selection-part_23.html)

[On the mythology of natural selection. Part VIII: Complex evolution without
selection?](http://ecodevoevo.blogspot.com/2014/07/on-mythology-of-natural-
selection-part_24.html)

[On the mythology of natural selection. Part IX: What would it mean if
selection really were deterministic?](http://ecodevoevo.blogspot.com/2014/07
/on-mythology-of-natural-selection-part_25.html)

[On the mythology of natural selection. Part X: Finally: Traveling evolution's
geodesics](http://ecodevoevo.blogspot.com/2014/07/on-mythology-of-natural-
selection-part_28.html)

