---
title: The Story of Adam and Eve Revisited
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
<!--more-->

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/KQ7qXRKL5pg" frameborder="0"> </iframe>

Related paper:

[The extremely ancient chromosome that isnt: a forensic bioinformatic
investigation of Albert Perrys X-degenerate portion of the Y chromosome](http:
//www.nature.com/ejhg/journal/vaop/ncurrent/abs/ejhg2013303a.html)

> Mendez and colleagues reported the identification of a Y chromosome
haplotype (the A00 lineage) that lies at the basal position of the Y
chromosome phylogenetic tree. Incorporating this haplotype, the authors
estimated the time to the most recent common ancestor (TMRCA) for the Y tree
to be 338?000 years ago (95% CI=237?000581?000). Such an extraordinarily early
estimate contradicts all previous estimates in the literature and is over a
100?000 years older than the earliest fossils of anatomically modern humans.
This estimate raises two astonishing possibilities, either the novel Y
chromosome was inherited after ancestral humans interbred with another
species, or anatomically modern Homo sapiens emerged earlier than previously
estimated and quickly became subdivided into genetically differentiated
subpopulations. We demonstrate that the TMRCA estimate was reached through
inadequate statistical and analytical methods, each of which contributed to
its inflation. We show that the authors ignored previously inferred Y-specific
rates of substitution, incorrectly derived the Y-specific substitution rate
from autosomal mutation rates, and compared unequal lengths of the novel Y
chromosome with the previously recognized basal lineage. Our analysis
indicates that the A00 lineage was derived from all the other lineages 208?300
(95% CI=163?900260?200) years ago.

The original abstract had the unicorn quote, which is taken out in the final
version. It does seem the very appropriate.

[Unicorn Genome Published](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/01/20
/unicorn-genome-published/)

