---
title: Lessons for Creating Good Open Source Software
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Every good work of software starts by scratching a developer's personal itch.
<!--more-->

Good programmers know what to write. Great ones know what to rewrite (and
reuse).

Plan to throw one [version] away; you will, anyhow. (Copied from Frederick
Brooks' The Mythical Man Month)

If you have the right attitude, interesting problems will find you.

When you lose interest in a program, your last duty to it is to hand it off to
a competent successor.

Treating your users as co-developers is your least-hassle route to rapid code
improvement and effective debugging.

Release early. Release often. And listen to your customers.

Given a large enough beta-tester and co-developer base, almost every problem
will be characterized quickly and the fix obvious to someone.

Smart data structures and dumb code works a lot better than the other way
around.

If you treat your beta-testers as if they're your most valuable resource, they
will respond by becoming your most valuable resource.

The next best thing to having good ideas is recognizing good ideas from your
users. Sometimes the latter is better.

Often, the most striking and innovative solutions come from realizing that
your concept of the problem was wrong.

Perfection (in design) is achieved not when there is nothing more to add, but
rather when there is nothing more to take away. (Attributed to Antoine de
Saint-Exupry)

Any tool should be useful in the expected way, but a truly great tool lends
itself to uses you never expected.

When writing gateway software of any kind, take pains to disturb the data
stream as little as possibleand never throw away information unless the
recipient forces you to!

When your language is nowhere near Turing-complete, syntactic sugar can be
your friend.

A security system is only as secure as its secret. Beware of pseudo-secrets.

To solve an interesting problem, start by finding a problem that is
interesting to you.

Provided the development coordinator has a communications medium at least as
good as the Internet, and knows how to lead without coercion, many heads are
inevitably better than one.

\---------------------------------------------------------------

Above text is borrowed from 1997 article ["The Cathedral and the Bazaar"
](http://www.catb.org/~esr/writings/homesteading/cathedral-bazaar/)of Eric S.
Raymond.

