---
title: Genome-based Personalized Medicine - a Letter
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
![](http://www.catchingfireflies.com/product_images/e/874/i_love_grandma__4160
5_std.jpg)
<!--more-->

>

Dear Andrew,

We regret to inform you that your grandma passed away after undergoing
'personalized' treatment at our genomic medical facility. Our experts
determined that she was reckless with her genome during her long life and
accumulated too many junk DNAs. Study shows that over 80% of the genome is
functional in normal people, whereas in her case, only 10% appeared to work
properly.

The immediate cause of her death was a blast, by which we do not want to mean
that she was having a good time in our hand. In fact she was in terrible pain,
when she called one of our nurses. To determine the cause of the pain, the
nurse ran a large blast search against the HUGO and NR databases.
Unfortunately, by the time blast completed its run, your grandma stopped
responding to any type of alignment, annotation or GO analysis. We later
determined that she only needed help to go to the toilet and that was the
cause of her pain. However, running blast is part of standard procedure in our
personalized medical facility, whereas your grandma's non-genomic need was
exceptional.

In fact, our programs could easily determine her need to go to toilet, if our
variant caller worked properly. We utilize open-source software from one of
the top research centers in Boston, but sadly their cryptic codes do not come
with too many comments. A few months back, our software intern on H7-visa
incorrectly modified a C-macro to convert output format from begin=0 genomic
coordinate to begin=1 genomic coordinate. We just found out that all if our
variant calls made since then had been wrong. Your grandma had a short
deletion on chr7:1729112-1729114, which is common in all women between age
90-95 with frequent need to go to restroom. Shift that by one base and you get
the genomic marker for constipation !!

The only ray of hope in this whole saga was the 'positivity' treatment she
received every Thursday, based on the highly cited paper - ["Positive Affect
and the Complex Dynamics of Human Flourishing"](http://www.unc.edu/peplab/publ
ications/Fredrickson%20&%20Losada%202005.pdf). During that positivity
treatment, we tried to maintain a healthy ratio of 2.9 to 1 of positive
comments, positive remarks and positive food habits and she seemed to enjoy it
(as measured by marked improvement in vagal tone). At other times, we treated
her like crap. In future, we plan to expand this positivity experiment-control
treatment in combination with monitoring of gene expression profile of our
patients. Please keep us posted, if you or other members of your family likes
to enjoy top-notch genomic treatment at our center.

Sincerely,

Jonathan Clown, MD, PhD

Chief Bioinformatician and non-evolutionary Geneticist

Institute of Genomic Health, CA

\------------------------------------------------------------------------

Above commentary is written in jest, but what is reality? Ans. - it is no
better than above letter, based on a new study published in JAMA. (h/t:
@dangraur)

[Clinical Application of Whole-Genome Sequencing - Proceed With
Care](https://www.dropbox.com/s/qvojtq3t55kdich/jed140012.pdf)

> A number of concerns have been raised regarding the downstream consequences
of providing clinicians with interpreted genome scale data in an otherwise
healthy individual.12-14 Oneof the most pressing in an era of health care cost
containment is the concern that flagging potential risks in patients would
lead to resource intensive secondary testing and interventions of unclear
benefit. The yield of potentially clinically significant variations related to
inherited disease reported by Dewey et al for each participant was fairly
substantial (as reported in Table 2 of the article8). To explore the clinical
consequences of returning the results defined by the research team as
reportable from their 12 participants, the authors shared technical summary
reports (online supplemental material Sample Report8) to a small group of
volunteer clinicians (3 primary care clinicians and 2 medical geneticists) not
involved in the process of genome interpretation and analyzed their suggested
action steps. That the clinicians could make much sense of the variant reports
likely indicates a higher level of genomics expertise than their average peer
clinicians. The findings suggest, at least superficially, that concerns about
expensive immediate downstream clinical actions in every sequenced individual
may be unfounded.

On average, the panelists suggested an estimated 1 to 3 initial additional
diagnostic tests or referrals per individual at a cost of US $351 to US $776;
clearly those next steps could result in a cascade of interventions of unclear
costs. Despite the apparently reasonable hypothetical initial cost estimates,
an important finding was the fair to poor levels of agreement among physicians
regarding what variations should be acted on, as well as the diversity of next
steps recommended. Admittedly, both the patient and clinician sample size is
small. However, lack of agreement regarding clinical actions raises the
credible possibility that introducing WGS information into clinical encounters
at this time may be premature. Significant work is needed to develop evidence-
linked guidelines for clinical action. Education of physicians and other
health care practitioners regarding the potential risks and benefits of
obtaining WGS seems of paramount importance.

Medical decision making in the setting of an incomplete understanding of human
biology has been a part of caring for patients for thousands of years. For
better or worse, clinicians have developed skills to cope reasonably
effectively with substantial lacunae in knowledge.Complete elucidation of the
human genome sequence will undoubtedly be recorded in the annals ofmedical
science as a major step toward filling voids in understanding the biological
underpinnings of health and disease. In the near term, however, genome
sequencing has unmasked substantial additional fragments of the complexity
underlying health and disease.

Medical application of genomic and personalized medicine technologies hold out
the real promise of improved decision making and patient outcomes by providing
an increased knowledge of the determinants of health and disease at the level
of the individual patient. Like the personal computer, Internet, smartphones,
and electronic health records, turning back now from the use of genomic
technologies in health care is inconceivable.15 Studies like that of Dewey et
al provide a glimpse of what is possible but demonstrate that much remains to
be learned about previously assumed to be known information as well as myriad
known unknowns and unknown unknowns before truly successful widespread
integration can occur. A question facing potential early adopters of genome
sequencing as an adjunct to patient care is whether or not having WGS data, at
this time, will decrease uncertainty and improve outcomes or merely
exponentially increase the complexity of clinical care.

