---
title: Science Launches New PLOS One-like Journal 'Science Advances'
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
[Here is another Major change in the publishing
world](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/343/6172/709.full) \-
<!--more-->

> To help meet this need, as well as expand the current content of Science so
as to include even more diverse topics in science, engineering, technology,
mathematics, and the social sciences, AAAS will be launching, in early 2015, a
digital-only journal, Science Advances. Like Science, this new publication is
designed to encourage transformative research and serve a wide readership. Our
view at AAAS is that science is becoming more integrated and
interdisciplinary, and therefore we prefer to provide one additional broad
journal rather than a number of disciplinary titles, each with more limited
scope, that would all have to be searched to find the papers of most interest.
Also like Science, this new journal will aim for rapid publication. To contain
costs for Science Advances, the journal will publish original research and
review articles only, although select papers in Science Advances may be
highlighted in Science through News and Commentary coverage.

To ensure the greatest accessibility for authors and readers, the new journal
will be open access, with publication funded through author processing
charges. With this publishing model, the number of papers that can be
published is limited only by the quality of submissions. With digital-only
publication, all papers will be posted as soon as they are ready for
publication.

Nature already launched its own version - Nature Communications. Also, [from
Nature's website](http://www.nature.com/ncomms/open_access/index.html), you
can get some idea about the costs of making your papers open access or CC-BY.

> For authors who choose the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported (CC BY)
license, the APC is as follows:

$5,200 (The Americas)

3,700 (Europe)

661,500 (Japan)

RMB33,100 (China)

3,150 (UK and Rest of World)

For authors who choose the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-No
Derivs 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-ND) or Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0
Unported (CC BY-NC-SA) licenses, the APC is as follows:

$4,800 (The Americas)

3,425 (Europe)

612,150 (Japan)

RMB30,600 (China)

2,915 (UK and Rest of World)

For the rest of us, homolog.us is still free, open-access and comes with CC-
BY-NS-SA license :)

