---
title: Seven Major Trend Changes of 2013 - (vii) Larger Society
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
**7\. Larger society learned about extensive NSA spying, but is yet to recognize the fall of constitutional government**
<!--more-->

In January 2013, [Aaron Swartz](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aaron_Swartz), an
extremely gifted kid, was forced to commit suicide by US government for the
'horrible crime' of trying to make old scientific papers accessible to
researchers. The real mistake of Aaron Swartz was his successful effort to
block the [internet censorship law
SOPA](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stop_Online_Piracy_Act), which was backed
by many powerful players. As a result, those powerful people pursued their
next attempt to end internet freedom in complete secrecy.

[TPP: One More Attempt to End Internet Freedom after Failed
SOPA/PIPA](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/11/13/tpp-one-assault-
internet-freedom-sopapipa/)

Aaron Swartz's situation seemed like a case of an aggressive prosecutor, but
that perception of the government changed dramatically over the year. NSA
revelations by Edward Snowden convincingly demonstrated [the complete lawless
nature of the government](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/12/30
/important-talk-year/). That was not news for those of us keeping track of the
financial system since 2007 collapse, but the rest of the society started to
take notice only recently.

'Post-collapse society' is the best description of the contemporary USA, and
people in such post-collapse systems display interesting behavioral patterns
due to apparent conflict between the calmness of their immediate surrounding
and the possible chaos related to the collapse that already began, but they do
not see. A good example was those people in collapsing twin towers, who took
their time to turn off monitors before running away.

[9/11 survivors put off evacuation to shut down computers, study
finds](http://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/sep/09/september11.usa)

> Majority say they saved work, collected belongings or visited the bathroom
before fleeing World Trade Centre after attacks

More than 90% of survivors of the 9/11 terror attacks on the World Trade
Centre in New York delayed evacuating the buildings in order to carry out
tasks such as saving their work, shutting down computers, changing shoes and
visiting the bathroom, according to research released today.

Interviews with 271 survivors who worked in the twin towers found that only
8.6% fled as soon as the alarm was raised. The vast majority (91.4%) stayed
behind waiting for information or carrying out at least one additional task,
including phoning their family and collecting belongings.

The majority put their escape back by around eight minutes, with some delayed
by half an hour. People who tried to find out what was going on took between
1.5 and 2.6 times longer to respond to the alarm than those who didn't.

Similar post-collapse behavior was displayed by the people of Titanic, [who
did not want to go into the unknown of the sea leaving the comforting (but
sinking) ship](http://history1900s.about.com/od/1910s/a/titanicfacts.htm).

> Not only were there not enough lifeboats to save everyone on board, most of
the lifeboats that were launched off the Titanic were not filled to capacity.
For instance, the first lifeboat to launch, Lifeboat 7 from the starboard
side) only carried 24 people, despite having a capacity of 65 (two additional
people later transferred to Lifeboat 7 from Lifeboat 5). However, it was
Lifeboat 1 that carried the fewest people - only seven crew and five
passengers (a total of 12 people) despite having a capacity for 40.

[Link](http://www.titanicfacts.net/titanic-lifeboats.html)

> it is believed that this low number was due to passengers being reluctant to
leave the ship, as initially they did not consider themselves to be in
imminent danger.

\-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------
