---
title: Incredibly Powerful Speech from Brenner, but Ewan Birney Disagrees
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Sydney Brenner, a 'failed' biologist from UK, delivered a thought-provoking
talk in 2006.
<!--more-->

[Brenner hammers factory
science](http://www.mc.vanderbilt.edu:8080/reporter/index.html?ID=5027)

> The title of his talk was The Next 100 Years of Biology, but Brenner, whose
scientific triumphs include establishing the existence of messenger RNA, shied
away from speculation. Instead, he asked, What should we do over the next 100
years?

I think a lot of (biology) is going in absolutely the wrong direction, he
said.

The Human Genome Project, for example, has led to what Brenner called factory
science heavy investment in expensive gene sequencers that begin to drive the
direction of research.

You have 100 machines; you're looking at about $100 million of investment, he
said. And you've just got to keep that going all the time in order to get the
use from them.

This, he said, and the Genburo, the Politburo of Genetics, in which everything
is decided stultifies research, and discourages young people from entering the
field.

They think, 'How can I work in a field where this guy has a lab of 300 people
and all the tools and lots of money?' And I tell you something; one good idea
is worth more than all of that.

Because what we're looking for is innovation, something new, Brenner said. And
you won't get something new if you work within a completely established mode
of work. We need some people to stray off of the standard path and ask new
questions.

Speaking in the crackling cadence of his native South Africa, Brenner took
delight in piercing the latest biological trends, including the proliferation
of omic sciences.

I was asked by a business journal in England, The Economist, which was the
most important omic science for biotechnology, and I gave them the obvious
answer: it was that science called econ-omics, he chuckled.

So we now have a culture which is based on everything must be high-throughput,
Brenner continued. I like to call it low-input, high-throughput, no-output
biology.

I'm not taking advantage of my advanced years in order to make cracks about
this. But this is not the way to solve problems, he said.

The discovery of a gene, for example, doesn't necessarily mean that the
protein it encodes has an important function. You've got to have a theory on
how the cell works, Brenner said.

The same goes for translational research.

The promise of the human genome is that we will have millions of targets and
we can take all the chemicals, and we can just do high-throughput analysis on
all of these and find all the drugs for everything for the future from bench
to bedside.

I think this is totally wrong.

For one thing, this approach requires a therapeutic hypothesis, that blocking
a particular target could affect a physiological function or prevent a
disease.

It is very rare that I have seen coming out of basic labs hypotheses of these
kinds, Brenner argued, mostly because most people in basic labs don't know
anything about human physiology and pathology.

So I believe that the process should be the other way around. I think what we
can do very well now is to go from bedside to bench.

\--------------------------------------------------------

Ewan Birney, the most successful biologist from UK, used a figure to explain
what Brenner should have been doing instead.

![BjvJknECYAEwp4p](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2014/03
/BjvJknECYAEwp4p-300x244.png)

