---
title: Why no Nobel Prize for Biologists (and Mathematicians) ?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
In 1977, Carl Woese and George E. Fox published a seminal paper reporting on
the discovery of third kingdom of life. [Norm Pace described](http://en.wikipe
dia.org/wiki/Carl_Woese#Honors_and_scientific_legacy) Woese's contribution to
biology bigger than Darwin's.
<!--more-->

![](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/da/Carl_Woese.jpg
/220px-Carl_Woese.jpg)

> With regard to Woese's work on horizontal gene transfer as a primary
evolutionary process, Professor Norman Pace of the University of Colorado at
Boulder said, "I think Woese has done more for biology writ large than any
biologist in history, including Darwin.... There's a lot more to learn, and
he's been interpreting the emerging story brilliantly".

Although Woese received a number of other prestigious awards, he never got a
Nobel prize. In 2012 blog post, Jonathan Eisen made a strong case, but by
then, Woese was 84 years old and passed away later that year.

[Some arguments for why Carl Woese (and probably Norm Pace) deserves a Nobel
Prize](http://phylogenomics.blogspot.com/2012/09/some-arguments-for-why-carl-
woese-and.html)

> I note I do not think Woese should win a Nobel for discovering the archaea.
That was a groundbreaking finding but it does not fit well with the Nobel
Prize categories. I think he should win it for the concept of molecular
classification of microorganisms and applying this in general to the microbial
world around us. This concept (expanded by Norm Pace and colleagues to
uncultured microbes) revolutionized our approach to studying single microbes
in the environment, to studying single microbes infecting people and to
studying communities of microbes in and on people. And thus Woese and Pace in
my opinion deserve the Nobel Prize for Medicine. I will be expanding on this
in a future post ...

One reason Woese was not 'Nobel-worthy' is that there is no Nobel prize in
biology. The closest one being awarded is [for
medicine](http://www.igb.illinois.edu/about/archaea).

> In 2003 the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences awarded Woese the Crafoord
Prize in Biosciences for his discovery of the third domain of life. The
Crafoord award honors scientists whose work does not fall into any of the
tags: []
categories covered by Nobel Prizes.

But why not? Why are the Nobel prizes offered for other physical sciences are
for basic sciences (physics and chemistry), but the one for life science is in
an applied area? The answer to that question is the same as why there is no
Nobel prize for mathematics (Yes, we are aware of the bad joke that Alfred
Nobel disliked mathematicians, because one of them had an affair with his wife
- [dude was never married](http://www.snopes.com/science/nobel.asp)).

To understand, you need to go back to Europe of 19th century, where Alfred
Nobel lived. In European society of that time, mathematicians were highly
respected in academic circles, whereas physics, chemistry and medicine were
all considered applied areas. Physics of that time was closer to what we call
engineering today and quantum physics was not born. In fact, Max Planck, who
made a big contribution to start the quantum revolution, was discouraged to
study physics, because the field was considered to be saturated.

> The Munich physics professor Philipp von Jolly advised Planck against going
into physics, saying, "in this field, almost everything is already discovered,
and all that remains is to fill a few holes."[6] Planck replied that he did
not wish to discover new things, but only to understand the known fundamentals
of the field, and so began his studies in 1874 at the University of Munich.
Under Jolly's supervision, Planck performed the only experiments of his
scientific career, studying the diffusion of hydrogen through heated platinum,
but transferred to theoretical physics.

In 1877 he went to Berlin for a year of study with physicists Hermann von
Helmholtz and Gustav Kirchhoff and mathematician Karl Weierstrass. He wrote
that Helmholtz was never quite prepared, spoke slowly, miscalculated
endlessly, and bored his listeners, while Kirchhoff spoke in carefully
prepared lectures which were dry and monotonous. He soon became close friends
with Helmholtz. While there he undertook a program of mostly self-study of
Clausius's writings, which led him to choose heat theory as his field.

In October 1878 Planck passed his qualifying exams and in February 1879
defended his dissertation, ber den zweiten Hauptsatz der mechanischen
Wrmetheorie (On the second law of thermodynamics). He briefly taught
mathematics and physics at his former school in Munich.

Most likely, Alfred Nobel wanted to take focus away from mathematics to other
applied areas, and in that, he was immensely successful. Little did he
realize, however, mathematics and mathematicians of previous era would go into
physics and chemistry and lead to revolutionary fundamental discoveries.
Nobody had any inkling of what would come in modern 'biology'.

