---
title: Feynman on Science vs Advertising (for New Generation of ENCODE-inspired 'Scientists')
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
We noticed this tweet about a talk at a 'science' conference.
<!--more-->

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2014/03/Capture6-300x38.png)

The problem is that science does not have room for "PR" and "advertising", as
argued by Feynman 40 years back.

[Cargo Cult Science](http://neurotheory.columbia.edu/~ken/cargo_cult.html)

> The easiest way to explain this idea is to contrast it, for example, with
advertising. Last night I heard that Wesson oil doesn't soak through food.
Well, that's true. It's not dishonest; but the thing I'm talking about is not
just a matter of not being dishonest; it's a matter of scientific integrity,
which is another level. The fact that should be added to that advertising
statement is that no oils soak through food, if operated at a certain
temperature. If operated at another temperature, they all will--including
Wesson oil. So it's the implication which has been conveyed, not the fact,
which is true, and the difference is what we have to deal with.

> I would like to add something that's not essential to the science, but
something I kind of believe, which is that you should not fool the layman when
you're talking as a scientist. I am not trying to tell you what to do about
cheating on your wife, or fooling your girlfriend, or something like that,
when you're not trying to be a scientist, but just trying to be an ordinary
human being. We'll leave those problems up to you and your rabbi. I'm talking
about a specific, extra type of integrity that is not lying, but bending over
backwards to show how you're maybe wrong, that you ought to have when acting
as a scientist. And this is our responsibility as scientists, certainly to
other scientists, and I think to laymen.

For example, I was a little surprised when I was talking to a friend who was
going to go on the radio. He does work on cosmology and astronomy, and he
wondered how he would explain what the applications of his work were. "Well,"
I said, "there aren't any." He said, "Yes, but then we won't get support for
more research of this kind." I think that's kind of dishonest. If you're
representing yourself as a scientist, then you should explain to the layman
what you're doing-- and if they don't support you under those circumstances,
then that's their decision.

One example of the principle is this: If you've made up your mind to test a
theory, or you want to explain some idea, you should always decide to publish
it whichever way it comes out. If we only publish results of a certain kind,
we can make the argument look good. We must publish BOTH kinds of results.

I say that's also important in giving certain types of government advice.
Supposing a senator asked you for advice about whether drilling a hole should
be done in his state; and you decide it would be better in some other state.
If you don't publish such a result, it seems to me you're not giving
scientific advice. You're being used. If your answer happens to come out in
the direction the government or the politicians like, they can use it as an
argument in their favor; if it comes out the other way, they don't publish at
all. That's not giving scientific advice.

Other kinds of errors are more characteristic of poor science. When I was at
Cornell, I often talked to the people in the psychology department. One of the
students told me she wanted to do an experiment that went something like this
--it had been found by others that under certain circumstances, X, rats did
something, A. She was curious as to whether, if she changed the circumstances
to Y, they would still do A. So her proposal was to do the experiment under
circumstances Y and see if they still did A.

These days, he would have looked at ENCODE instead of psychology department.

A good video -

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/EYPapE-3FRw" frameborder="0"> </iframe>
