---
title: The 'Right Way' and the 'Wrong Way' to Criticize Science
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2014/02/Capture5-300x70.png)
<!--more-->

\---------------------------------------------------------------

**Lior Pachter**

Every time we go to Lior Pachter's blog, we start with the assumption that he
is making a highly inflated claim. His titles seem too aggressive and the
accusations appear too strong. Moreover, his posts are loaded with information
and require more than one reading, whereas the time-saving approach is to
check what other scientists are saying in twitter. There you find nine out of
ten disagree with him and so he must be wrong !!

If, instead, you take enough care to go through all his points, it becomes
quite clear that he is factually correct and is making claims justified by
enough evidence. Take the current example, where he accuses Manolis Kellis of
MIT of fraud and misconduct. Those are very strong words in academia and we
started reading Pachter's blog with the default assumption that Kellis made an
honest mistake. Unfortunately, after we checked all details provided in
Pachter's post, it became clear that Kellis engaged in unethical and deceptive
practices well outside the norms of standard academic procedure.

What did he do? In a nutshell, he surreptitiously updated parts of supplement
of a paper published in Nature Biotech months after publication, but did not
declare that change anywhere. The updated supplement came with the following
innocuous note.

> In the version of this file originally posted online, in equation (12) in
Supplementary Note 1, the word max should have been min. The correct formula
was implemented in the source code. Clarification has been made to
Supplementary Notes 1.1, 1.3, 1.6 and Supplementary Figure 4 about

the practical implementation of network deconvolution and parameter selection
for application to the examples used in the paper. In Supplementary Data, in
the file ND.m on line 55, the parameter delta should have been set to 1
epsilon (that is, delta = 1 0.01), rather than 1. These errors have been
corrected in this file and in the Supplementary Data zip file as of 26 August
2013.

So far so good, but if one compares the old supplement with the new one, one
discovers more significant changes being made than what was stated in the
note. For example, Fig. S4 changed qualitatively and its caption changed from
-

> As it is illustrated in this ?gure, choosing ? close to one (i.e.,
considering higher order indirect interactions) leads to best performance in
all considered network deconvolution applications. Further, note that despite
the social network application, considering higher order indirect interactions
is important in gene regulatory inference and protein structural constraint
inference applications.

to -

> For regulatory network inference, we used ? = 0.5, for protein contact maps,
we used ? = 0.99, and for co-authorship network, we used ? = 0.95. Further,
note that despite the social network application, considering higher order
indirect interactions is important in gene regulatory inference and protein
structural constraint inference applications.

That completely changes the implication of the figure, and Lior Pachter
discussed mathematical reason behind the above modification. Irrespective of
whether his math is right, there are two even more fundamental problems in
surreptitiously switching figures.

a) Clearly, with the above changes, the updated version of the paper is
qualitatively different from the version that went through peer review. In
other words, one can easily argue that the currently published paper is NOT
peer-reviewed. If everyone is allowed to present one narrative during the
review process and another one months after publication, the scientific
publication process will turn into a farce.

b) In the past, occasionally scientists were allowed to correct or modify
erroneous figures after publication. The usual procedure is to tell the editor
and issue an erratum. The erratum includes a note saying that the corrected
figure does not change the science presented in the paper, and if the editor
has any doubt, he consults the reviewers about the claim. Instead Kellis
merely sneaked in the new supplementary figure without mentioning about it
anywhere. We are not sure, why such practices should be condoned.

\-----------------------------------------------------------------

**Joe Pickrell**

After reading Joe Pickrell's commentary about recent Elhaik/Graur paper, we
came to conclude that he is seriously compromised as a scientist.

Last month, Eran Elhaik, Dan Graur and co-authors published a paper, where
they suggested that a leading researcher in their sub-field of human
population genetics used statistics to lie. Based on their analysis, the paper
by Mendez et al. inflated a bunch of numbers to make a newsworthy discovery.
Those could be honest mistakes and [we specifically asked the first author
Eran Elhaik whether that is the
case](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/01/23/dan-graurs-latest-bombshell-
implications-jewish-genetics/).

> **Q6. Based on your analysis, do the statistical errors appear to be
intentional (purposely done to make inflated claim), or are they likely to be
honest mistakes?**

EE: I cannot speak to intent, however random errors are likely to both inflate
and deflate the chromosome age and this is not what we observed.

For a second opinion, we headed to Joe Pickrell's blog, where he claimed to
have discussed Graur/Mendez paper. Sadly, we were very disappointed. [He
seemed to have completely avoided the main point of Graur/Elhaik
paper](http://jkplab.org/2014/01/26/y-chromosome-adam-may-not-have-been-
human/) (accusation of purposely pushing numbers to make inflated claims),
which appears to be very serious to us for integrity of the entire field. It
was even more strange, that he completely avoided the question after repeated
prodding by us and Dan Graur.

Joe Pickrell is an expert in this area and he also maintains Haldane's Sieve
blog, whose presumed role is to provide an open online discussion forum for
preprints in population genetics. How can an expert in a field not care about
deceptive behavior bordering on fraud? What kind of science does he stand for?

Interestingly, Joe Pickrell does not see anything wrong in switching figures
post-publication either.

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2014/02/Capture6-300x284.png)

\---------------------------------------------------

Edit. 2/19

In a twitter conversation, Joe Pickrell provided his objective criticism of
Elhaik vs Mendez paper. For the sake of completeness and readers' benefit, we
add them here. Thank you Joe !!

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2014/02/Capture16-300x284.png)

![Capture2](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2014/02/Capture25-300x136.png)

