---
title: Whiskey Tango Foxtrot - Arianna Huffington Embraces PNAS-published Junk Science
  of Positivity !!!
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
As the model of contemporary world goes, anything published in 'peer-reviewed'
journals becomes truth and something reaches the status of 'the truthest' by
getting published Nature. Junk DNA died with ENCODE paper, but today's
commentary is about one PNAS-published little truth covered in our earlier
blog post -
<!--more-->

[Tragedy of the Day: PNAS Got Duped by Positivity Lady
!!](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/08/05/tragedy-of-the-day-pnas-got-
duped-by-positivity-lady/)

Arianna Huffington published a book titled 'Thrive', where she [brought this
truth of success to the common folks](http://chiropractorhouston-thejoint.com
/woodlake-square/the-pursuit-of-happiness-why-ancient-philosophers-were-right-
all-along/).

> Arianna Huffingtons new book, Thrive: The Third Metric to Redefining Success
and Creating a Life of Well-Being, Wisdom, and Wonder, are all about the
science behind these ancient findings that only confirm the power of ancient
psychology and philosophy. On a basic, intuitive level, weve understood for
hundreds of years that many of these old-time lifestyle practices allow us to
live happy, healthy lives. But now, with additional confirmation from science
itself, we can fully understand these pieces of ancient wisdom as simple fact.

One of the beliefs that now holds scientific merit is helping others, and how
it really does lead to improved personal health and happiness.

In their eternal quest to find the best way to live, Greek philosophers
debated the benefits of hedonic and eudaimonic happiness. Hedonic well-being
is that which views happiness as a factor for greater pleasure and less pain,
while eudaimonic happiness implys someone who holds a larger purpose or
meaning in life. Now, a study conducted by University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill psychologist Barbara Fredrickson might reveal which kind of
happiness is the most beneficial for long-term wellness and health.

The study was first published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences in 2013 and realized that eudaimonic happiness could better promote
physical health and longevity, too. The study used phone interviews,
questionnaires and blood samples to explore how the two kinds of happiness
influenced individuals on a genetic level. What they found was that
participants employing more hedonic and less eudaimonic well-being showed a
lower production of virus-attacking antibodies, with participants who offered
more eudaimonic well-being experienced a rise in antibody production.

If you do not believe in text description, here we have her video for you
talking about positivity science and 'inflammation markers' in Charlie Rose
show (forward to 6:00) -

