---
title: 'Origin of the cell nucleus, mitosis and sex: roles of intracellular coevolution'
categories:
- ncRNA
---
<!--more-->

[T. Cavalier-Smith](http://www.biologydirect.com/content/5/1/7) \-

> Background: The transition from prokaryotes to eukaryotes was the most
radical change in cell organisation since life began, with the largest ever
burst of gene duplication and novelty. According to the coevolutionary theory
of eukaryote origins, the fundamental innovations were the concerted origins
of the endomembrane system and cytoskeleton, subsequently recruited to form
the cell nucleus and coevolving mitotic apparatus, with numerous genetic
eukaryotic novelties inevitable consequences of this compartmentation and
novel DNA segregation mechanism. Physical and mutational mechanisms of origin
of the nucleus are seldom considered beyond the longstanding assumption that
it involved wrapping pre-existing endomembranes around chromatin. Discussions
on the origin of sex typically overlook its association with protozoan entry
into dormant walled cysts and the likely simultaneous coevolutionary, not
sequential, origin of mitosis and meiosis.

Results: I elucidate nuclear and mitotic coevolution, explaining the origins
of dicer and small centromeric RNAs for positionally controlling centromeric
heterochromatin, and how 27 major features of the cell nucleus evolved in four
logical stages, making both mechanisms and selective advantages explicit: two
initial stages (origin of 30 nm chromatin fibres, enabling DNA compaction; and
firmer attachment of endomembranes to heterochromatin) protected DNA and
nascent RNA from shearing by novel molecular motors mediating vesicle
transport, division, and cytoplasmic motility. Then octagonal nuclear pore
complexes (NPCs) arguably evolved from COPII coated vesicle proteins trapped
in clumps by Ran GTPase-mediated cisternal fusion that generated the
fenestrated nuclear envelope, preventing lethal complete cisternal fusion, and
allowing passive protein and RNA exchange. Finally, plugging NPC lumens by an
FG-nucleoporin meshwork and adopting karyopherins for nucleocytoplasmic
exchange conferred compartmentation advantages. These successive changes took
place in naked growing cells, probably as indirect consequences of the origin
of phagotrophy. The first eukaryote had 1-2 cilia and also walled resting
cysts; I outline how encystation may have promoted the origin of meiotic sex.
I also explain why many alternative ideas are inadequate.

Conclusion: Nuclear pore complexes are evolutionary chimaeras of endomembrane-
and mitosis-related chromatin-associated proteins. The keys to understanding
eukaryogenesis are a proper phylogenetic context and understanding organelle
coevolution: how innovations in one cell component caused repercussions on
others.

