---
title: The Slow Death of Purposeless Research
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
BBC has an wonderful commentary on [The slow death of purposeless
walking](http://www.bbc.com/news/magazine-27186709)
<!--more-->

> Walking is a luxury in the West. Very few people, particularly in cities,
are obliged to do much of it at all. Cars, bicycles, buses, trams, and trains
all beckon.

Instead, walking for any distance is usually a planned leisure activity. Or a
health aid. Something to help people lose weight. Or keep their fitness. But
there's something else people get from choosing to walk. A place to think.

Wordsworth was a walker. His work is inextricably bound up with tramping in
the Lake District. Drinking in the stark beauty. Getting lost in his thoughts.

"As a single footstep will not make a path on the earth, so a single thought
will not make a pathway in the mind. To make a deep physical path, we walk
again and again. To make a deep mental path, we must think over and over the
kind of thoughts we wish to dominate our lives."

Charles Dickens was a walker. He could easily rack up 20 miles, often at
night. You can almost smell London's atmosphere in his prose. Virginia Woolf
walked for inspiration. She walked out from her home at Rodmell in the South
Downs. She wandered through London's parks.

Henry David Thoreau, who was both author and naturalist, walked and walked and
walked. But even he couldn't match the feat of someone like Constantin
Brancusi, the sculptor who walked much of the way between his home village in
Romania and Paris. Or indeed Patrick Leigh Fermor, whose walk from the Hook of
Holland to Istanbul at the age of 18 inspired several volumes of travel
writing. George Orwell, Thomas De Quincey, Nassim Nicholas Taleb, Friedrich
Nietzsche, Bruce Chatwin, WG Sebald and Vladimir Nabokov are just some of the
others who have written about it.

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/Capture-
300x102.png)

But how about purposeless research? Taleb points out that purposeless research
is also dead in contemporary academia.

The implications are even more troubling.

![Capture2](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2014/05/Capture2-300x86.png)

There is no freedom in academic research any more.

