---
title: Scientists Predict Longer, Harsher Winter
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
For comic relief, right from the top of yahoo news -
<!--more-->

[Jet stream shift could prompt harsher winters:
scientists](http://news.yahoo.com/jet-stream-shift-could-prompt-harsher-
winters-scientists-132931128.html)

> A warmer Arctic could permanently affect the pattern of the high-altitude
polar jet stream, resulting in longer and colder winters over North America
and northern Europe, US scientists say.

The jet stream, a ribbon of high altitude, high-speed wind in northern
latitudes that blows from west to east, is formed when the cold Arctic air
clashes with warmer air from further south.

The greater the difference in temperature, the faster the jet stream moves.

According to Jennifer Francis, a climate expert at Rutgers University, the
Arctic air has warmed in recent years as a result of melting polar ice caps,
meaning there is now less of a difference in temperatures when it hits air
from lower latitudes.

"The jet stream is a very fast moving river of air over our head," she said
Saturday at a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of
Science.

"But over the past two decades the jet stream has weakened. This is something
we can measure," she said.

As a result, instead of circling the earth in the far north, the jet stream
has begun to meander, like a river heading off course.

This has brought chilly Arctic weather further south than normal, and warmer
temperatures up north. Perhaps most disturbingly, it remains in place for
longer periods of time.

Here is the image to sell the piece of junk science linked above -

![Capture0](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2014/02/Capture02-300x220.png)

\-------------------------------------------------------

The 2000 edition is shown below, but let us give you the punchline: "Children
just aren't going to know what snow is".

Poor children !!

[Snowfalls are now just a thing of the
past](http://www.independent.co.uk/environment/snowfalls-are-now-just-a-thing-
of-the-past-724017.html)

> Britain's winter ends tomorrow with further indications of a striking
environmental change: snow is starting to disappear from our lives.

Sledges, snowmen, snowballs and the excitement of waking to find that the
stuff has settled outside are all a rapidly diminishing part of Britain's
culture, as warmer winters - which scientists are attributing to global
climate change - produce not only fewer white Christmases, but fewer white
Januaries and Februaries.

The first two months of 2000 were virtually free of significant snowfall in
much of lowland Britain, and December brought only moderate snowfall in the
South-east. It is the continuation of a trend that has been increasingly
visible in the past 15 years: in the south of England, for instance, from 1970
to 1995 snow and sleet fell for an average of 3.7 days, while from 1988 to
1995 the average was 0.7 days. London's last substantial snowfall was in
February 1991.

Global warming, the heating of the atmosphere by increased amounts of
industrial gases, is now accepted as a reality by the international community.
Average temperatures in Britain were nearly 0.6C higher in the Nineties than
in 1960-90, and it is estimated that they will increase by 0.2C every decade
over the coming century. Eight of the 10 hottest years on record occurred in
the Nineties.

However, the warming is so far manifesting itself more in winters which are
less cold than in much hotter summers. According to Dr David Viner, a senior
research scientist at the climatic research unit (CRU) of the University of
East Anglia,within a few years winter snowfall will become "a very rare and
exciting event".

"Children just aren't going to know what snow is," he said.

