---
title: " Nicholas Wade's Other Controversial Book"
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
![220px-Nicholas_Wade](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2014/08
/220px-Nicholas_Wade-201x300.png)
<!--more-->

The subject of human genetics does not interest us, but we got curious after
noticing a lot of digital ink being spent on Nicholas Wade's recent book (see
[here](http://ecodevoevo.blogspot.com/2014/06/the-visible-colors-and-
falseness-of.html), [here](http://www.michaeleisen.org/blog/?p=1609) and
[here](http://news.sciencemag.org/biology/2014/08/geneticists-decry-book-race-
and-evolution)). In fact, population geneticists do not like the book so much
that they decided to write [a letter to whoever](http://cehg.stanford.edu
/letter-from-population-geneticists/) to protest against it. That goes against
the unwritten rule we were taught in physics, where we were not expected to
popularize a document that we did not like and let obscurity take over it.

This undue publicity got us interested in other books written by Wade, and we
found a gem that is highly worth reading. Wade published "[THE NOBEL DUEL: The
Scientists' 21-Year Race to Win the World's Most Coveted
Prize](http://www.amazon.com/Nobel-Duel-Nicholas-Wade/dp/0385149816/ref=sr_1_1
?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1407740874&sr=1-1&keywords=nobel+duel)" in 1981. The
reviews are fantastic, but where can we find the book?

NY Times:

[ANOTHER KIND OF SCIENTIFIC METHOD](http://www.nytimes.com/1981/12/20/books
/another-kind-of-scientific-method.html)

> ''The Nobel Duel'' outlines the dark side of science - the sort of rivalry
that featured so prominently in James D. Watson's ''The Double Helix,'' but
without the humor. The absence of humor undoubtedly stems from the
personalities of the two protagonists, who wandered far from the traditional
courtesies of their profession to gain what more talented but less driven
scientists failed to acquire.

Roger Guillemin and Andrew Schally, the first a French-born physician, the
other a blunt Polish refugee who started his research career as a laboratory
technician, are scarcely typical scientists. One-time colleagues, they formed
two teams that, in their determination to gain the same objective and gain it
first, ignored almost all of the scientific niceties.

In a profession that insists on giving fair credit to every scientist who has
contributed in any way to a specific finding - ''If I have seen further ... it
is by standing upon the shoulders of Giants,'' in Newton's phrase - Guillemin
and Schally were notably reluctant to acknowledge each other's efforts.
Guillemin consistently omitted Schally's work from his review articles, and
Schally typically shrugged aside a dispute among members of his own team with
the comment: ''What did it matter to me? It's my lab - I got the glory
anyway.'' Similarly, both men refused to cooperate in the traditional manner
of scientific teams embarked on the same research problem. ''Don't talk to the
enemy,'' Mr. Schally told his team. ''I would have preferred a more open
relationship, in which we could have got on the telephone and saved each other
time,'' conceded one former member of the Guillemin group. And in an academic
world that frowns on secrecy as anathema - or at least more suitable to
industrial laboratories - Guillemin and Schally often withheld information
from scientific meetings for fear of alerting the opposition to a fruitful
advance.

The tenor of the rivalry comes through best in an exchange of letters quoted
by Mr. Wade: '' 'Your somewhat derogatory and deprecating remarks ...
surprised me as the attack on Pearl Harbor surprised the U.S. Navy,' Schally
complained in a letter written after a conference in which Guillemin had
allegedly slighted Schally's contributions. Guillemin's reply to the charges
was carefully calculated to vex his volatile adversary to the utmost: 'I have
no comments except to say that I am neither your conscience nor your
psychiatrist,' he wrote.''

If their relationship was hardly typical of the world of science, neither was
the quest on which the two men embarked. They sought to discover and
characterize the hormones that the brain uses to control temperature,
reproduction, growth and a host of other body functions. These peptide
hormones, we now know, exist in minute amounts in the part of the brain called
the hypothalamus. Since the biological residue left by a single fingerprint
may contain more material than the hormones from a thousand hypothalami, the
search for the elusive hormones became an exercise in large-scale
biotechnology. At times, Guillemin and Schally spent more time in
slaughterhouses than they did in their laboratories. For one experiment, which
in spite of all efforts failed, Guillemin collected half a million sheep
hypothalami; Schally, with smaller resources, made do with a paltry 200,000
pig hypothalami at a time.

Any major piece of research in modern biology demands specialization greater
than any single scientist can possess, and both men assembled their own teams
of chemists, biochemists, physiologists and other experts to make their
assault on the hormones, and on the rival group. Indeed, toward the end of the
race, both became glorified lab managers rather than active scientists,
rounding up funds, suggesting experiments and firing ripostes at their
opposite number, but rarely carrying out the grueling repetition of everyday
laboratory work.

Guillemin and Schally also threw their energies into lobbying scientists who
might help them to land the Nobel Prize. Once they had successfully -and
almost simultaneously -succeeded in identifying the obscure hormones, they
assiduously courted Rolf Luft, a leading member of the Nobel awards committee.
An editorial by Guillemin in the influential New England Journal of Medicine
prominently credited Luft's research, although it had little obvious
connection with Guillemin's. Schally planned to give Luft the honor of
performing the clinical trials of one of the chemicals that emerged from his
team's work.

[Kirkus Reviews](https://www.kirkusreviews.com/book-reviews/nicholas-wade-2
/the-nobel-duel-the-scientists-21-year-race-to-w/):

> Science writer Wade gets off to a rousing start: the Nobel prize ceremonies
in Stockholm in 1977, with Rosalyn Yalow seated between her co-sharers in the
physiology-or-medicine prize, Roger Guillemin and Andrew Schally--a proverbial
rose between thorns. Guillemin and Schally, chafing at their proximity, glower
with the mutual enmity that has been the scandal of the endocrinology world.
For years each had tried--racing with the other--to isolate and synthesize the
brain chemicals reputed to control the release of pituitary hormones, small
proteins with horrendous names like luteinizing hormone releasing factor
(LRF), thyroid releasing factor (TRF), etc. The book then flashes back to the
two men's early years--and ends with a coda on what rivalry and competition
may or may not do for science. (Yalow was not involved in the rivalry, but her
part in developing sensitive assay techniques paid off in identifying the
chemicals involved.) Guillemin, a Frenchman, migrated to Texas via Montreal,
and now presides over a prestigious lab at the Salk Institute in La Jolla.
Schally, a Pole, settled in the New Orleans VA Hospital with colleagues at
Tulane. For five years the rivals actually collaborated, existing in a state
of muted Cold Wax. Then hostilities broke out with a vengeance. We see
Guillemin behaving like a suave Napoleonic commander, missing no opportunity
to excoriate Schally with innuendo and irony. Schally, a soldier's son who
also recruited troops, was more blunt, direct, and aggressive. To their
credit, both men were captivated with Englishman Geoffrey Harris' theory that
the brain controlled the pituitary gland by releasing chemicals from the
hypothalmus, a small cluster of nerve cells linked to the pituitary. Their
belief and preliminary work flew in the face of conventional wisdom, but was
vindicated over time. Wade details the progress of the rival labs, the final
round-the-clock race, and the scandalous secrecy in the supposedly share-the-
findings world of science. It is at times an exhilarating suspense tale, at
times a poignant reading of some of the second lieutenants or spiritual
leaders (like Harris). But in the end one wearies of these humorless, hard-
driven megalomaniacs. What they did, ironically, was not brilliant science
like Watson-Crick, but the tedious grinding up of thousands of tons of pig or
sheep hypothalmi for analysis and purification. Good writing, juicy quotes,
but dreary, rather dreadful protagonists.

