---
title: The Astonishing Story of Nick Brown, Who Debunked the Mathematics of Happiness
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
![](http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-
images/Admin/BkFill/Default_image_group/2014/1/15/1389799662251/Masters-
student-Nick-Brow-001.jpg)
<!--more-->

Readers of our blog should be quite familiar with 'The Happiness Lady', who
managed to dupe PNAS to get her genetics paper accepted (check [Tragedy of the
Day: PNAS Got Duped by Positivity Lady
!!](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/08/05/tragedy-of-the-day-pnas-got-
duped-by-positivity-lady/)). UK's Guardian [published a nice commentary on
Nick Brown](http://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/jan/19/mathematics-of-
happiness-debunked-nick-brown), who exposed this lady's previous highly cited
'mathematical' paper. His advice for other would-be rebels - _"If you want to
be a whistleblower you have to be prepared to lose your job."_ His advice to
Frederickson and other scientists - _"What you do in science is you make a
statement of what you think will happen and then run the experiment and see if
it matches it. What you don't do is pick up a bunch of data and start reading
tea leaves. Because you can always find something. If you don't have much data
you shouldn't go round theorising. Something orange is going to happen to you
today, says the astrology chart. Sure enough, you'll notice if an orange
bicycle goes by you."_ Tell that to ENCODE-leaders.

More from the Guardian piece -

> The astonishing story of Nick Brown, the British man who began a part-time
psychology course in his 50s and ended up taking on America's academic
establishment

....................

Fredrickson is a distinguished psychologist, a professor at the University of
North Carolina, a winner of several notable psychology awards and bestselling
author of a number of psychology books, including Positivity, which took her
and Losada's academic research and recast it for a mass audience the subtitle
ran "Top-Notch Research Reveals the 3-to-1 Ratio That Will Change Your Life".

"Just as zero degrees celsius is a special number in thermodynamics," wrote
Fredrickson in Positivity, "the 3-to-1 positivity ratio may well be a magic
number in human psychology."

Fredrickson is the object of widespread admiration in the field of psychology.
Martin Seligman, former president of the American Psychological Association
and a bestselling author in his own right, went so far as to call her "the
genius of the positive psychology movement". On top of which she is also an
associate editor at American Psychologist.

By contrast, Brown was a first-term, first-year, part-time masters student who
was about to take early retirement from what he calls a "large international
organisation" in Strasbourg, where he had been head of IT network operations.
Who was he to doubt the work of a leading professional which had been accepted
by the psychological elite? What gave him the right to suggest that the
emperor had gone naturist?

"The answer," says Brown when I meet him in a north London cafe, "is because
that's how it always happens. Look at whistleblower culture. If you want to be
a whistleblower you have to be prepared to lose your job. I'm able to do what
I'm doing here because I'm nobody. I don't have to keep any academics happy. I
don't have to think about the possible consequences of my actions for people I
might admire personally who may have based their work on this and they end up
looking silly. There are 160,000 psychologists in America and they've got
mortgages. I've got the necessary degree of total independence."

Armed with that independence, he went away and looked at the maths that
underpinned Fredrickson and Losada's ratio. Complex or non-linear dynamics are
not easy for an untrained mathematician to understand, much less work out.
Losada, who claimed expertise in non-linear dynamics, was working as a
business consultant and making mathematical models of business team behaviour
when he first met Fredrickson.

Read the rest [here](http://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/jan/19
/mathematics-of-happiness-debunked-nick-brown#start-of-comments). It is well-
written and goes over how the 'scientists' are paid through grants, high-
profile books and lecture circuits paying $30,000-$50,000 an engagement.

