---
title: Why are Bacteria Different from Eukaryotes?
categories:
- ncRNA
---
Evolution of eukaryotic cell is undoubtedly the hardest problems in
evolutionary biology. We have been trying to list all differences between
eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells, but came across [this wonderful
interview](http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/11/119) of Julie A Theriot
that would save our time.
<!--more-->

**1\. Physical separation of transcription and translation**

> The most obvious difference between eukaryotes and bacteria is that there is
a membrane-bounded nucleus in eukaryotes and not in bacteria - again, for the
most part: there is a bacterium with the wonderful name Gemmata obscuriglobus
that is described as having a double membrane enclosing the DNA in a nucleus-
like structure [3], although the structure is apparently contiguous with the
plasma membrane [4], so in that sense it is very different from a eukaryotic
nuclear membrane and this is certainly a special case. But leaving that
example aside, the main consequence biologically of having a membrane-enclosed
nucleus is that transcription and translation are uncoupled. So there is a
fundamental kinetic and organizational difference between eukaryotes and
bacteria in the way that genetic information is expressed in the form of
protein and is therefore allowed to be converted into cellular structure,
function and organization.

**2\. Other membrane-bounded organelles**

> Another major difference between eukaryotes and bacteria is the
proliferation of other membrane-bounded organelles, of which you see many
different kinds within single eukaryotic cells - for example, the Golgi
apparatus, the endoplasmic reticulum, and so on. Again, there are a few
bacteria that have internal membranes, although in most cases those membrane-
enclosed organelles in bacteria are contiguous with the plasma membrane, like
the pseudo-nuclear membrane of Gemmata.

**3\. Ability to form large and complex multicellular structures**

> Another major observable difference is that eukaryotic cells are able to
make very big, fancy, multicellular organisms like redwood trees and
elephants. Among the three major groups of macro-organisms (those visible to
the naked eye), animals and plants are the better studied, but the largest
fungi are also remarkable for their vast size and lifespan [8]. Bacteria can
also form multicellular structures, such as biofilms, that require complex
intercellular signaling and developmental programs, as well as deposition of
extracellular matrix [9], but they do not approach the structural complexity
of eukaryotic multicellular organisms. The largest of the bacterial
communities are formed by cyanobacteria and are called stromatolites; these
are made up of beautiful layered structures that form through cycles of
bacterial growth, matrix deposition, and accretion of mineral particles
[10,11]. Stromatolite structures, though, have remained fundamentally
unchanged for over three billion years, as stromatolites make up the oldest
recognizable fossils of living organisms.

**4\. Large genome size**

> Finally, and I think not coincidentally, eukaryotes typically have genomes
that are greatly expanded in length by as much as several orders of magnitude
beyond those of bacteria, and those genomes usually contain a lot more
noncoding DNA whose function we dont understand.

Readers will find the remaining article intriguing, where she hypothesized
that the above differences could be explained in terms of evolution of
cytoskeleton structure.

\----------------------------------------------

The readers will also find the following article by Dan Graur thought-
provoking.

[The Phylogeny of Everything, the Origin of Eukaryotes, and the Rules of
Taxonomy: Death to Archaea, Bacteria, and Eucarya! Long live Archaebacteria,
Eubacteria, Eukaryota, and
Prokaryota!](http://judgestarling.tumblr.com/post/79135526488/the-phylogeny-
of-everything-the-origin-of-eukaryotes)

> The origin of the eukaryotic cell is one of the hardest and most interesting
puzzles in evolutionary biology (Lake 2007). Any theory attempting to describe
the evolution of eukaryotes must be able to explain the following seven
eukaryotic characteristics: (1) The eukaryotic cell is considerably more
complex than the prokaryotic cell, possessing, among others a nucleus with a
contiguous endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi bodies, flagella with a 9+2 pattern of
microtubule arrangement, and organelles surrounded by double membranes. (2)
Only eukaryotes achieved great size and morphological complexity, whereas
prokaryotes have remained small and have not evolved either morphological
complexity or multicellularity. (3) The protein-coding genes of eukaryotes are
interspersed with introns that need to be removed prior to translation by
spliceosomes. (4) The process of transcription is physically and temporally
separated from the process of translation. (5) The eukaryote genome consists
of components that are archaebacterial and components that are eubacterial.
(6) The distribution of the archaebacterial and eubacterial genomic components
is not random with respect to function. (7) There are no known precursor
structures among prokaryotes from which such attributes could be derived, and
no intermediate cell types known that would point to a gradual evolutionary
change of a prokaryote into a eukaryote. For all intents and purposes, the
eukaryotic cell represents a sudden organizational upgrade or an evolutionary
leap. Moreover, any theory on eukaryote evolution must provide a reason why
the length of time it took for prokaryotes to evolve out of inanimate matter
is so much shorter than the time it took eukaryotes to evolve out of
prokaryotes.

