---
title: Insane Decision of the Day - Broad Institute Gets $650M to Cure Insanity !!
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Over the last few months, I have been working on a rebuttal paper in the field
of genetics + psychology and found an unbelievable number of garbage papers
from well-known universities. After carefully pondering about what was going
on, I came to the conclusion that too much money had been chasing too few
ideas in the field. Abundance of money is the root cause of irreproducibility
of much of the new era science. The areas of research flush with stupid money
are seeing the highest recall rates.
<!--more-->

Now to make things worse -

[$650M gift to Broad seeks to propel psychiatric research](http://news.harvard
.edu/gazette/story/2014/07/broad_psychiatric_research_gift/)

> The Broad Institute today announced an unprecedented commitment of $650
million from philanthropist Ted Stanley aimed at galvanizing scientific
research on psychiatric disorders and bringing new treatments based on
molecular understanding to hundreds of millions of people around the world.

The Stanley commitment the largest ever in psychiatric research and among the
largest for scientific research in general will support research by a
collaborative network of researchers within the Stanley Center for Psychiatric
Research at the Broad Institute, a biomedical research institution that brings
together faculty from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Harvard
University, the Harvard-affiliated hospitals, and collaborators worldwide.

We are back to the [old medieval alchemy
mentality](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alchemy): "The defining objectives of
alchemy are varied but historically have typically included one or more of the
following goals: the creation of the fabled philosopher's stone; the ability
to transform base metals into the noble metals (gold or silver); and
development of an elixir of life, which would confer youth and longevity."

Those looking for variety of opinions can check the comment section of 'In the
Pipeline' blog covering this topic -

[The Broad Gets $650 Million For Psychiatric Research](http://pipeline.corante
.com/archives/2014/07/22/the_broad_gets_650_million_for_psychiatric_research.p
hp)

