---
title: Three Amazing Applications of CRISPR&#47;cas9
categories:
- chem
---
Changing genome in plants used to be incredibly difficult, but not any more.
Here is an excellent review -
<!--more-->

[Plant genome editing made easy: targeted mutagenesis in model and crop plants
using the CRISPR/Cas system](http://www.plantmethods.com/content/9/1/39)

> Targeted genome engineering (also known as genome editing) has emerged as an
alternative to classical plant breeding and transgenic (GMO) methods to
improve crop plants. Until recently, available tools for introducing site-
specific double strand DNA breaks were restricted to zinc finger nucleases
(ZFNs) and TAL effector nucleases (TALENs). However, these technologies have
not been widely adopted by the plant research community due to complicated
design and laborious assembly of specific DNA binding proteins for each target
gene. Recently, an easier method has emerged based on the bacterial type II
CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats)/Cas
(CRISPR-associated) immune system. The CRISPR/Cas system allows targeted
cleavage of genomic DNA guided by a customizable small noncoding RNA,
resulting in gene modifications by both non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) and
homology-directed repair (HDR) mechanisms. In this review we summarize and
discuss recent applications of the CRISPR/Cas technology in plants.

\-------------------------------------------

Correction of genetic disease? That is awesome !!

[Correction of a Genetic Disease in Mouse via Use of CRISPR-
Cas9](http://www.cell.com/cell-stem-cell/abstract/S1934-5909\(13\)00462-1)

>

Highlights

A dominant cataract-causing mutation in the Crygc gene is corrected using
CRISPR-Cas9

Genetic correction via HDR uses information from the endogenous WT allele

Genetic correction can also occur using information from an exogenous oligo

The rescued mice can transmit the corrected allele to their progeny

Summary

The CRISPR-Cas9 system has been employed to generate mutant alleles in a range
of different organisms. However, so far there have not been reports of use of
this system for efficient correction of a genetic disease. Here we show that
mice with a dominant mutation in Crygc gene that causes cataracts could be
rescued by coinjection into zygotes of Cas9 mRNA and a single-guide RNA
(sgRNA) targeting the mutant allele. Correction occurred via homology-directed
repair (HDR) based on an exogenously supplied oligonucleotide or the
endogenous WT allele, with only rare evidence of off-target modifications. The
resulting mice were fertile and able to transmit the corrected allele to their
progeny. Thus, our study provides proof of principle for use of the CRISPR-
Cas9 system to correct genetic disease.

\-------------------------------------------

Curing cystic fibrosis? Unbelievable !!

[Functional Repair of CFTR by CRISPR/Cas9 in Intestinal Stem Cell Organoids of
Cystic Fibrosis Patients](http://www.cell.com/cell-stem-
cell/abstract/S1934-5909\(13\)00493-1)

> Highlights

The CRISPR/Cas9 system enables genome editing in intestinal stem cell
organoids

cAMP-induced swelling is lost in CFTR mutant organoids of cystic fibrosis
patients

CRISPR/Cas9-mediated repair of the CFTR locus restores organoid swelling

Summary

Single murine and human intestinal stem cells can be expanded in culture over
long time periods as genetically and phenotypically stable epithelial
organoids. Increased cAMP levels induce rapid swelling of such organoids by
opening the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductor receptor (CFTR). This
response is lost in organoids derived from cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. Here
we use the CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing system to correct the CFTR locus by
homologous recombination in cultured intestinal stem cells of CF patients. The
corrected allele is expressed and fully functional as measured in clonally
expanded organoids. This study provides proof of concept for gene correction
by homologous recombination in primary adult stem cells derived from patients
with a single-gene hereditary defect.

