---
title: PNAS Publishes the Equation of Happiness
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
BBC reports - (h/t: Nick Brown)
<!--more-->

[Equation 'can predict momentary happiness'](http://www.bbc.com/news/science-
environment-28592838)

> "We can look at past decisions and outcomes and predict exactly how happy
you will say you are at any point in time," said lead author Dr Robb Rutledge
from University College London.

"The brain is trying to figure out what you should be doing in the world to
get rewards, so all the decisions, expectations and the outcomes are
information it's using to make sure you make good decisions in the future. All
of the recent expectations and rewards combine to determine your current state
of happiness," he told BBC News.

Think of going to a restaurant for example, having low expectations may
improve your dining experience if the food is better than expected. But having
positive expectations may improve your happiness before the meal even starts
because of your anticipation of the event.

Here is the equation -

![_76658853_76658852](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2014/08/76658853_76658852-300x31.jpg)

We post the abstract of original paper below with no additional comments. One
thing for sure, it will not see similar level of scrutiny as the STAP paper
from Japan.

[A computational and neural model of momentary subjective well-
being](http://www.pnas.org/content/early/2014/07/31/1407535111)

>

**Significance**

A common question in the social science of well-being asks, How happy do you
feel on a scale of 0 to 10? Responses are often related to life circumstances,
including wealth. By asking people about their feelings as they go about their
lives, ongoing happiness and life events have been linked, but the neural
mechanisms underlying this relationship are unknown. To investigate it, we
presented subjects with a decision-making task involving monetary gains and
losses and repeatedly asked them to report their momentary happiness. We built
a computational model in which happiness reports were construed as an
emotional reactivity to recent rewards and expectations. Using functional MRI,
we demonstrated that neural signals during task events account for changes in
happiness.

**Abstract**

The subjective well-being or happiness of individuals is an important metric
for societies. Although happiness is influenced by life circumstances and
population demographics such as wealth, we know little about how the
cumulative influence of daily life events are aggregated into subjective
feelings. Using computational modeling, we show that emotional reactivity in
the form of momentary happiness in response to outcomes of a probabilistic
reward task is explained not by current task earnings, but by the combined
influence of recent reward expectations and prediction errors arising from
those expectations. The robustness of this account was evident in a large-
scale replication involving 18,420 participants. Using functional MRI, we show
that the very same influences account for task-dependent striatal activity in
a manner akin to the influences underpinning changes in happiness.

