---
title: The Most Challenging Problem in Bioinformatics
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
In [chapter 6 of his
book](http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/origin/chapter6.html), Darwin wrote -
<!--more-->

> If it could be demonstrated that any complex organ existed, which could not
possibly have been formed by numerous, successive, slight modifications, my
theory would absolutely break down. But I can find out no such case.

Although Darwin mentioned complex organs, the statement would be equally valid
for complex unicellular organisms not widely known in his time. The genome
sequencing projects over the last 15 years shows one case that 'absolutely
breaks down' the idea of numerous, successive, slight modifications to get to
complexity, and that is the origin of eukaryotic organisms from prokaryotes.
Eugene Koonin describes the problem as 'enimagtic'. Dan Graur calls it 'one of
the hardest and most interesting puzzles'. The difficulty is being more and
more appreciated with the availability of many different protozoic genome.

What is the challenge? It appears that a large number of eukaryotic genes came
from 'nowhere' (check this 2002 paper - [The origin of the eukaryotic cell: A
genomic investigation](http://www.pnas.org/content/99/3/1420.full)). Moreover,
every possible scenario of explaining their gradual origin over evolutionary
time hits one or other roadblock. It appears that eukaryotes have a number of
novel genomic toolkits and the entire package came into earliest eykaryotic
cell ('LECA') together.

In our blog on evolution, we are collecting a number of relevant papers with
short explanations about various potential conjectures, but you can see that
the question is far from answered.

Anyone interested in this topic should first start with [Bill Martin's
wonderful review paper](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/ncrna/2014/11/02/early-
evolution-without-a-tree-of-life/). The other excellent ones are linked below.

[Koonin: The Origin and Early Evolution of Eukaryotes in the Light of
Phylogenomics](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/ncrna/2014/10/30/koonin-the-origin-
and-early-evolution-of-eukaryotes-in-the-light-of-phylogenomics/)

[Why are Bacteria Different from
Eukaryotes?](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/ncrna/2014/10/29/why-are-bacteria-
different-from-eukaryotes/)

[Why are Bacteria Different from Eukaryotes?
(ii)](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/ncrna/2014/10/29/why-are-bacteria-different-
from-eukaryotes-ii/)

[A new fusion hypothesis for the origin of Eukarya: better than previous ones,
but probably also wrong](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/ncrna/2014/11/02/a-new-
fusion-hypothesis-for-the-origin-of-eukarya-better-than-previous-ones-but-
probably-also-wrong/)

[Origin of the cell nucleus, mitosis and sex: roles of intracellular
coevolution](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/ncrna/2014/11/02/origin-of-the-cell-
nucleus-mitosis-and-sex-roles-of-intracellular-coevolution/)

[A Few Other Useful Resources](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/ncrna/2014/11/01/a
-few-other-useful-resources/)

\---------------------------------------------------

Removed based on suggestion from Erich -

<del>Can the bioinformaticians stick to developing tools and leave answering
fundamental problems to others? That results in a large amount of duplicate
work, and a good example in this context is [the CEGMA
paper](http://korflab.ucdavis.edu/datasets/cegma/). The authors did not
acknowledge in their paper that the same question was answered by evolutionary
biologists for many years prior to their work, and neither did they bother to
ask the fundamental questions answered in the prior papers. Two noteworthy
examples of uncited prior work -

[The origin of the eukaryotic cell: a genomic
investigation](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11805300)

[A comprehensive evolutionary classification of proteins encoded in complete
eukaryotic genomes](http://genomebiology.com/2004/5/2/r7)</del>

