---
title: Two Papers from Koonin on Genome Architecture
categories:
- ncRNA
---
[Evolution of Genome
Architecture](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18929678)
<!--more-->

> Charles Darwin believed that all traits of organisms have been honed to near
perfection by natural selection. The empirical basis underlying Darwin s
conclusions consisted of numerous observations made by him and other
naturalists on the exquisite adaptations of animals and plants to their
natural habitats and on the impressive results of artificial selection. Darwin
fully appreciated the importance of heredity but was unaware of the nature
and, in fact, the very existence of genomes. A century and a half after the
publication of the Origin, we have the opportunity to draw conclusions from
the comparisons of hundreds of genome sequences from all walks of life. These
comparisons suggest that the dominant mode of genome evolution is quite
different from that of the phenotypic evolution. The genomes of vertebrates,
those purported paragons of biological perfection, turned out to be veritable
junkyards of selfish genetic elements where only a small fraction of the
genetic material is dedicated to encoding biologically relevant information.
In sharp contrast, genomes of microbes and viruses are incomparably more
compact, with most of the genetic material assigned to distinct biological
functions. However, even in these genomes, the specific genome organization
(gene order) is poorly conserved. The results of comparative genomics lead to
the conclusion that the genome architecture is not a straightforward result of
continuous adaptation but rather is determined by the balance between the
selection pressure, that is itself dependent on the effective population size
and mutation rate, the level of recombination, and the activity of selfish
elements. Although genes and, in many cases, multigene

regions of genomes possess elaborate architectures that ensure regulation of
expression, these arrangements are evolutionarily volatile and typically
change substantially even on short evolutionary scales when gene sequences
diverge minimally. Thus, the observed genome archtiectures are, mostly,
products of neutral processes or epiphenomena of more general selective
processes, such as selection for genome streamlining in successful lineages
with large populations. Selection for specific gene arrangements (elements of
genome architecture) seems only to modulate the results of these processes.

[Darwinian evolution in the light of
genomics](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19213802)

> Comparative genomics and systems biology offer unprecedented opportunities
for testing central tenets of evolutionary biology formulated by Darwin in the
Origin of Species in 1859 and expanded in the Modern Synthesis 100 years
later. Evolutionary-genomic studies show that natural selection is only one of
the forces that shape genome evolution and is not quantitatively dominant,
whereas non-adaptive processes are much more prominent than previously
suspected. Major contributions of horizontal gene transfer and diverse selfish
genetic elements to genome evolution undermine the Tree of Life concept. An
adequate depiction of evolution requires the more

complex concept of a network or forest of life. There is no consistent
tendency of evolution towards increased genomic complexity, and when
complexity increases, this appears to be a nonadaptive consequence of
evolution under weak purifying selection rather than an adaptation. Several
universals of genome evolution were discovered

including the invariant distributions of evolutionary rates among orthologous
genes from diverse genomes and of paralogous gene family sizes, and the
negative correlation between gene expression level

and sequence evolution rate. Simple, non-adaptive models of evolution explain
some of these universals, suggesting that a new synthesis of evolutionary
biology might become feasible in a not so

remote future.

