---
title: 'A new fusion hypothesis for the origin of Eukarya: better than previous ones,
  but probably also wrong'
categories:
- ncRNA
---
This paper from Patrick Forterre summarizes his current thoughts. However, one
needs to first read [Bill Martin's review
paper](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/ncrna/2014/11/02/early-evolution-without-a
-tree-of-life/) before venturing into specific hypotheses.
<!--more-->

[Link](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21034817)

> I discuss here the possibility that Eukarya originated from the engulfment
of a thaumarchaeon by a PCV (Planctomycetes, Verrucomicrobia, Chlamydiae)
bacterium, followed by invasions of NCLDV and retroviruses. The thaumarchaeon
provided both informational and operational proteins (actins, ESCRT proteins),
including some essential proteins absent in other archaeal phyla (Topo IB),
whereas the PVC bacterium provided phospholipids, tubulin and the membrane
coat proteins required for the formation of the nucleus. Viral invasions
introduced many proteins that are specific to modern Eukarya and produced an
arms race that favoured the evolution of Eukarya toward increasing complexity.
This scenario is the best possible fusion hypothesis that can be presently
proposed. However, it still requires several ad hoc assumptions to explain the
origin of the nucleus and the distribution pattern of archaeal and bacterial
traits in modern Eukarya. Furthermore, it still fails to explain convincingly
the origin of eukaryal viruses and the existence of three distinct lineages of
ribosomes. I conclude that Eukarya and their viruses more probably evolved
from a specific lineage, according to the three domains scenario originally
proposed by Carl Woese.

Bill Martin's criticism (119 refers to above paper) -

> In the age of genomes, even supporters of the phagotrophic theory had to
account for the circumstance that eukaryotes had archaebacterial informational
genes, but preferably without extensive and specific rate fluctuations protein
sequence evolution of the quantum evolution type hard-wired into the theory.
Hence a second and popular solution to the origin of informational and
operational genes was to suppose that eukaryote evolution, presumably one that
gave rise to the nucleus, usually presumed to have arisen in a eubacterial
host. Several variants on this theme emerged [112-118], and continue to emerge
[119]. Those theories have at least three major problems in common. First, and
in contrast to chloroplasts and mitochondria, the nuclear compartment is in no
way homologous to a prokaryotic cell, hence the whole (100 year old) notion
that the nucleus was ever an endosymbiont is tenuous to begin with [120]. As
with the flagellum [121] or microbodies [122], there is no evidence or
homology at all to suggest that the nucleus is descended from an symbiotic
bacterium. Second, they derive a cell that has eubacterial genome and
eubacterial ribosomes in the cytosol, with the informational genes locked up
within the archaebacterial endosymbiont. No formulations of nucleosymbiotic
origins to date, even the most recent [119], provides any sound rationale as
to how we arrive at a state where the ancestral eubacterial ribosomes and
genome in the cytosol are gone and the archaebacterial ribosomes are operating
in the cytosol while the archaebacterial chromosomes

are retained in the nucleus. Third, theories for an endosymbiotic origin of
the nucleus suffer, like the phagotrophic theory, from the circumstance that
they all

educe, as their crucial intermediate, a eukaryote that primitively lacks
mitochondria (an archezoon), thereby predicting that primitively
mitochondrion-lacking groups should still be around today. Contrary to that
prediction, it has turned out that all eukaryotic groups either once possessed
or still possess mitochondria, either in the form of O2-respiring
mitochondria, anaerobic mitochondria, hydrogen-producing mitochondria
(hydrogenosomes) or highly reduced mitochondria (mitosomes) [123-129].
Nucleosymbiotic origin theories keep cropping up in new garb, probably because
none of them really account for the observations and remain unconvincing,
sometimes even to their proponents [119].

