---
title: Is It Time to Get the ENCODE Paper Retracted?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
![](http://www.evolutionnews.org/dgraur.jpg)
<!--more-->

Dan Graur's ENCODE bombshell - ["On the immortality of television sets:
function in the human genome according to the evolution-free gospel of ENCODE"
](http://gbe.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2013/02/20/gbe.evt028.short?rss=
1) came out in February 2013. For several months, he was treated like pariah,
and well-connected researchers with vested interests (e.g. Daniel Macarthur
and BioMickWatson) called him a troll in public. Others quickly distanced
themselves from him, except for [one fringe
blog](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/).

These days, we sense seeping anger against ENCODE among almost all biologists
not connected with the project. They realize by now that Dan Graur stated the
obvious - ENCODE was pulling the wool over everyone's eyes. All those press
releases and simultaneous publication of 30 or so papers had only one purpose
- to hide the fact that the mega-project achieved nothing. The other part of
the equation has also become clear. The $300 million ENCODE wasted to fool
them was supposed to go for their research under normal circumstances.

Science magazine possibly sensed that change in mood, when they decided to
publish a full profile and interview of Dan Graur last month. One may find the
abstract written by Yudhijit Bhattacharjee titled toward ENCODE ("others have
taken issue with his style"). However, everyone should recognize that by
publishing the interview, Science made a major shift from where they stood
last year and before (check Pennisi's ["ENCODE Project Writes Eulogy for Junk
DNA"](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/337/6099/1159.summary)). Full abstract
of [Yudhijit Bhattacharjee's interview of Dan
Graur](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/343/6177/1306.summary) is posted
below.

> When the ENCODE Project claimed that there is no such thing as junk DNA, Dan
Graur counterattacked. The heart of his critique is that ENCODE researchers
have made an unwarranted leap in the interpretation of their data. He alleges
that the motivation of ENCODE leaders was to create a media splash that would
justify the project's cost. Some agree with the substance of his criticisms;
others have taken issue with his style.

It is absolutely clear that ENCODE claims and methods have done incalculable
damage to science. For example, [check this coverage of "Evolution News and
Views"](http://www.evolutionnews.org/2014/04/dan_graur_the_v084181.html) (an
Intelligent Design website) of Dan Graur's interview in Science. They argue
that Dan Graur is refusing to accept the facts published in a major scientific
journal and is holding on to his old dogma of evolution.

> Bhattacharjee leaves the situation at a standoff. The ENCODE leaders
consider Graur's provocations rude; Graur considers them guilty of self-
promotion and self-delusion. Graur asks, "How do you know it's functional?"
ENCODE responds, "How do you know it's not?" Graur's null hypothesis is
"assume no function"; ENCODE thinks the opposite: "specific biological
activity" indicates that something interesting is happening.

By assuming that "everything is shaped by evolution," Graur begs the question
of evolution. Not only that, he mixes metaphors: intelligent agents shape
things. His argument is contradictory: he says that evolution is "weeding out"
junk, but he knows that the cell continues to expend wasted energy by
transcribing all that alleged junk. He discounts the "tremendous amount of
activity" ENCODE found in non-coding DNA. Finally, his choice of null
hypothesis is dependent on his worldview: "assume no function" fits his belief
that the genome is filled with junk.

Why not "assume function" as the null hypothesis? We see from history that the
evolutionary teaching about "vestigial organs" held science back for a century
or more. More recently, we have seen the "junk DNA" myth to be a science
stopper. And now, the modENCODE project is showing the same pattern of
pervasive biological activity in the fruit fly genome that was found in the
human genome.

Sadly, their line of reasoning is absolutely correct, if scientific methods
and records are to be trusted. ENCODE published a very high-profile and peer-
reviewed paper claiming functionality of 80% of human genome and then refused
to address Graur's objections. How can we now tell the public to believe in
peer-reviewed research on vaccination and other issues, yet ask them not to
trust ENCODE's findings?

Clearly, the only way to remedy this incalculable harm is through retraction
of the main ENCODE paper. Given the visibility ENCODE obtained through their
press releases and other PR methods, we do not see how else the problem can be
fixed. In addition to the main ENCODE paper, [Lior Pachter will likely argue
about also retracting the Ward-Kellis
paper](http://liorpachter.wordpress.com/2014/02/12/why-i-read-the-network-
nonsense-papers/) as well.

Edit. He says he will be happy to see a correction of Ward/Kellis.

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2014/04/Capture12-300x85.png)

