---
title: Small Science and Big Science
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
**Small Science**
<!--more-->

[ABC conjecture](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abc_conjecture) is an
interesting conjecture that will lead to many other consequences in number
theory. For example, Fermat's last theorem can be easily derived from it. No
proof of abc conjecture has been found since mid-1980s, when it was first
proposed.

> The conjecture is stated in terms of three positive integers, a, b and c
(hence the name), which have no common factor and satisfy a + b = c. If d
denotes the product of the distinct prime factors of abc, the conjecture
essentially states that d is usually not much smaller than c. In other words:
if a and b are composed from large powers of primes, then c is usually not
divisible by large powers of primes.

In August 2012, Japanese mathematician Shinichi Mochizuki claimed to have
proven it, but his proof is to long and complex that nobody understands it.
There is another problem however. Those interested in understanding the proof
are in USA, but Mochizuki has no interest to stay in USA for a few months and
explain it.

> Attempts at verifying Mochizuki's work are severely hampered by his refusal
to leave his home university and lecture on his new mathematics, as is
standard in the academy.

If his proof stands, it will revolutionize number theory for the next 100 or
1000 years, because of the other associated consequences ([a short list
here](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abc_conjecture#Some_consequences)), but Mr.
Mochizuki is not in hurry. Moreover, when questions arise about his proof, he
merely posts revisions or updates on his website.

We first came across Shinichi Mochizuki's name, because [he is also suspected
to be the creator of mathematical algorithm behind
bitcoin](http://qz.com/86255/the-mysterious-creator-of-bitcoin-could-be-
japanese-mathematician-shinichi-mochizuki-says-the-inventor-of-hypertext/).

\-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
----
