---
title: A Review of &ldquo;Bioinformatics Algorithms &ndash; An Active Learning Approach&rdquo;
  by Compeau and Pevzner
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
We are honored to receive a complimentary copy of the new book by [Phillip
Compaeu](http://www.math.ucsd.edu/~pcompeau/) and his mentor [Pavel
Pevzner](http://cseweb.ucsd.edu/~ppevzner/). The book has beauty written all
over it. Not only the text is masterfully composed, but the biological
insights, illustrations, color-coded links to Rosalind, etc. all point to
extensive care and thinking that went into design of the book. Moreover, it
comes with a few unexpected bonuses as described later.
<!--more-->

**Seven Well-written Chapters**

Seven, the number of chapters in the book, is not randomly picked, but has
deeper significance to the authors. Both authors are (were) members of a
special group currently going extinct in the USA. More on that later along
with the story of their sacred city, but let us discuss the book first.

Each chapter attempts to answer a biological/bioinformatics question, but also
has multiple sub-themes for students from different backgrounds. The chapters
are so elegantly planned that readers from different backgrounds will go
through them and will end up learning completely different topics in
increasing order of complexity. For example, a reader with biology background
learns about different aspects of algorithm design with the first chapter
providing introduction to algorithmic approach, second chapter explaining
brute force algorithms and the following chapters discussing (iii) randomized
(probabilistic) algorithms, (iv) graph algorithms, (v) dynamic programming,
(vi) combinatorial algorithms and (vii) combinatorial pattern matching. A
reader with computer science background will get familiar with genetics in
proper order through the chapters, with first chapter introducing him to DNA
double strands, second chapter discussing genetic code and so on.

In many ways, the text reminds us of Feynman's Lectures of Physics. One major
similarity is that even though it presents complex topics in very simple
language, the book is not useful only for novices. Experts will also feel that
they learned new things or new ways of thinking about topics they had been
familiar with.

**To MOOC or Not to MOOC That is NOT the Question**

This book is one component of MOOC/Active Learning strategy of Pevzner and his
team, with [Rosalind](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2012/09/18/rosalind-
project-at-algorithmic-biology-laboratory-st-petersburg/) and [Pevzner's
Coursera lectures](https://www.coursera.org/instructor/pavelpevzner) being the
other two. In blogosphere and elsewhere, we see plenty of discussions about
MOOC vs traditional classroom lectures (for example check ["Bessels correction
and the dangers of MOOCs"](https://liorpachter.wordpress.com/2014/05/25
/bessels-correction-and-the-dangers-of-moocs/) in Lior Pachter's blog), but we
find them battling a false dichotomy. The real question is whether one can
utilize the internet/electronic technology to come up with a greatly improved
way of teaching compared to what classroom lectures provide. When you view
MOOCs in that way, you will find that Pevzner and his team presented a
thoughtful approach to utilize the new technology.

To remind the readers that this book is strengthened by other components of
MOOC, each section has links to relevant Rosalind questions. Also, the STOP
and THINK pauses in the book are possibly linked to similar pauses in the
Coursera lecture, where Pevzner allows students to reflect on the previous
topic before moving on to the next one.

Correction from Compeau on above paragraph:

> This is not necessarily true. It's true in some places, but the idea was for
these questions to keep students at the right pace by constantly asking them
probing questions, as if we were having a Socratic conversation with them.

We should also mention that not only the book is written to aid the students
taking Pevzner's online class, its writing benefited from those students.
Compeau pointed out that they listened to comments from 3,000 students in the
online class discussing the materials in the Coursera mailing list and
incorporated them into revising the text. So, you can see a beautiful
'massively online' positive feedback going on here.

**Bonus 1 - Beautiful Pictures**

![chapter7_final](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2014/07/chapter7_final.jpg)

Each of the seven chapters starts with a beautiful cartoon picture showing
Pevzner and Compeau solving problems in some kind of wild setting. They were
drawn by Randall Christopher, a very talented artist based in San Diego, who
also worked with Pevzner for his previous book. [Here](http://bearandfox.com)
is his website. Even the design of those pictures show plenty of thinking
going behind them. For example, in chapter 7, a monkey and Pevzner are rushing
to get to a cart of bananas from the roof of a bus about to go off the cliff,
while Compeau is barely holding the bus through a rope tied to a tree. Speed
is very critical in recovering the bananas and in the subject matter of the
chapter as well. The number plate of the bus is ANN-B$AA. Can you guess what
its inverse BWT is?

Another aspect of those pictures is to utilize some cultural image the
students are already familiar with so that they can better relate to the
chapter. For example, the mentioned image on the cover of chapter 7 is
inspired by cliffhanging scene in "The Italian Job" that is used more recently
in -

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/EYoUIO-JblU" frameborder="0"> </iframe>

Apart from those cover images for each chapter, you find plenty of
illustrations inside the book to properly explain the algorithms. Even the use
of color throughout the book has been elegantly done.

**Bonus 2 History Lessons**

The second bonus of the book is history lessons from Pevzner. Most
mathematicians we came across were interested in history and especially in the
origin of discoveries in mathematics, because that gave them interesting
perspectives into development of human thinking over the centuries. Pevzner
and Compeau are no exceptions. The real bonus here is to learn about Soviet
and Russian history from Pevzner, because that part does not often get
discussed in US-centric books. As an example, he explained in a superb way why
Stalin prize was more important than the Nobel prize. Sure the Nobel prizes
made many scientists famous, but Stalin prize gave a Russian geneticist
'relief from Stalin's purge' card and saved his life from Beria. What Pevzner
did not mention (for space reason) was that Stalin himself did not have Stalin
prize and died from Beria's poisoning, and Beria died in the hand of
Khrushchev soon after. What a nightmare !

Modern Russians do not want to claim of ownership any of those criminals and
Pevzner is no exception. In all history sections, he made proper distinction
between 'Soviet' and 'Russian'. For example, the Kalinin was properly
described as a Soviet revolutionary, but the scientists positively
contributing society were correctly referred to as Russian scientists.

**Importance of the Number Seven**

That brings us to the number seven, which is part of another beautiful history
lesson in the book. See whether the following picture makes any sense to you,
and if not, you are definitely not part of the special group going extinct in
USA (namely the 'mathematicians').

![front_cover](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2014/07/front_cover.jpg)

The above image shows the seven bridges of Knigsberg, which, in the context of
this book, is associated with the earliest graph theory problem solved by any
mathematician ever. That mathematician happens to be Euler, the most prolific
mathematician of the modern era. Moreover, Knigsberg, a Prussian city, was
very important in the history of modern science and philosophy. [Immanuel
Kant](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Immanuel_Kant) spent his entire life there
and [David Hilbert](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Hilbert) was born as
well. The city does not exist any more and that aspect of history is well
covered in the book. During WW II, it got destroyed by US/UK bombing and then
Stalin's army chased all Germans out. Most scholars fled to Gttingen, the
university of Gauss and the depopulated city was taken over by the Soviets. It
exists under a new name - Kaliningrad - and has an odd position in the map
with respect to Russian territories.

**References**

The references in the book are meticulously done, and as an unexpected bonus,
Phillip Compeau cited a mathematics paper by Bill Gates, when he was
undergraduate student at Harvard. In fact, Compeau is extending the ideas in
that paper for his PhD research on pancake flipping :)

**The Development Team**

Apart from Pevzner and Compeau, the book has a highly skilled development team
consisting og Olga Botvinnik, Son Pham, Nikolay Vyahhi and Kai Zhang.

![s200_olga.botvinnik](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2014/07/s200_olga.botvinnik.jpg)

![F08028M_PhamKimSon](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2014/07
/F08028M_PhamKimSon-265x300.jpg)

Here you see Vyahhi's Stepic (where the book was hosted for the course) being
[described as Russia's hottest
startup](http://calvertjournal.com/articles/show/2916/russia-top-digital-
start-ups).

![stepic_founder](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2014/07
/stepic_founder-300x192.jpg)

![852227](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2014/07/852227-300x300.jpg)

**Publisher**

Even in choosing publisher, Compeau and Pevzner went out of traditional route
and picked Active Learning Publishers LLC, a new publishing house for books
emphasizing active learning approach. We could not find their website and the
only way to contact the company is through the website of this book.

**Summary**

In summary, "Bioinformatics Algorithms An Active Learning Approach" is a well-
written and elegantly designed book that we like to read many times.

