---
title: Evomics Conference and a Paper by Carl Woese
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
![](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/12
/CollapsedtreeLabels-simplified.svg/200px-CollapsedtreeLabels-
simplified.svg.png)
<!--more-->

The Evomics workshop is taking place in Cesky Krumlov. If you are interested,
please follow twitter hashtag #evomics2014 or check their
[website/blog](http://evomics.org/blog) for useful bioinformatics training
material (h/t: @pathogenomenick). If this new omics word is unfamiliar to you,
it is a combination of "evolution and genomics". The current workshop is on
genomics, whereas another workshop on molecular evolution will be held in
2015.

The readers of this blog are familiar with 'genomics', but what exactly is
'molecular evolution'? We are not looking for the [technical
definition](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Molecular_evolution) (quite apparent
from the name of our blog), but rather the scientific truth being pursued
through the efforts. After all, when the word 'evolution' is introduced, we
are beyond the domain of engineering (practical tools being built on clearly
defined theories) and in the domain of science (fuzzy theories seeking
discovery and explanation). Let us explain.

In a paper titled - [A New Biology for a New
Century](http://mmbr.asm.org/content/68/2/173.full), legendary molecular
biologist Carl Woese wrote: (h/t: ecodevoevo blog)

> Science is impelled by two main factors, technological advance and a guiding
vision (overview). A properly balanced relationship between the two is key to
the successful development of a science: without the proper technological
advances the road ahead is blocked. Without a guiding vision there is no road
ahead; the science becomes an engineering discipline, concerned with temporal
practical problems. In its heyday the representation that came to dominate and
define 20th century biology, molecular biology, was a rich and inspiring blend
of the two. By the end of the 20th century, however, the molecular vision of
biology had in essence been realized; what it could see of the master plan of
the living world had been seen, leaving only the details to be filled in. How
else could one rationalize the strange claim by some of the world's leading
molecular biologists (among others) that the human genome (a medically
inspired problem) is the Holy Grail of biology? What a stunning example of a
biology that operates from an engineering perspective, a biology that has no
genuine guiding vision!

The entire paper is worth reading, but here are a few thought-provoking
sections from the paper -

> In questioning the doctrine of common descent, one necessarily questions the
universal phylogenetic tree. That compelling tree image resides deep in our
representation of biology. But the tree is no more than a graphical device; it
is not some a priori form that nature imposes upon the evolutionary process.
It is not a matter of whether your data are consistent with a tree, but
whether tree topology is a useful way to represent your data. Ordinarily it
is, of course, but the universal tree is no ordinary tree, and its root no
ordinary root (61). Under conditions of extreme HGT, there is no (organismal)
tree. Evolution is basically reticulate.

or,

> The root of the universal tree is an artifact resulting from forcing the
evolutionary course into tree representation when that representation is
inappropriate (60). In the pre-Darwinian era the evolutionary course cannot be
represented by an organismal tree topology. It is only after a more advanced
stage in cellular evolution has been reached that tree representation begins
to become useful. That stage is the Darwinian threshold, the critical point
before which HGT dominates the evolutionary dynamic and after which it does
notthus allowing stable organismal genealogies to emerge.

Also, please check the [timely discussion held by ecodevoevo blog
today](http://ecodevoevo.blogspot.com/2014/01/not-procrustean-science.html).

> Clearly, Woese wasn't averse to finding uncertainty where others didn't,
challenging accepted wisdom. And, that's what he did in his discussion of the
state of biology in 2004 -- molecular biology as he saw it was too
reductionist and too reliant on technology, and thus, in danger of focusing
too closely not even on the trees, but on twigs on trees, or perhaps xylem and
phloem. His view was that it was becoming impossible to see the larger
picture. Or as he put it, "molecular biology could read notes in the score,
but it couldn't hear the music."

According to Woese, 19th century biology faced two separate challenges --
understanding the gene and the cell, and understanding evolution and the
nature of development and the organizational structure of organisms. The first
tasks could be, and were attacked in a reductionist way, by the corollary of
the view in physics that reality only existed at the atomic level, and
consisted of the interaction of atoms and whatever forces made that happen.
Using technology, then -- microscopes, PCR machines and DNA sequencers -- we
learned a tremendous amount about genes and cells. Cells were the reduced
units of organs, and genes of cells, and understanding would be found at those
reduced levels.

