---
title: Splitting Our Blog into Different Subsections
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Dear Readers,
<!--more-->

We are planning to split our blog into multiple subsections. Each part (called
'study section' henceforth) is guaranteed to carry a topic that interests
nobody. To make matters worse, most study section will be underfunded, i.e.
updated sparingly, often with no prior notice and at times in the middle of
polar night.

Please let us know if you find any topic interesting so that we can change it
before it is too late. Being useless and uninteresting are very important
criteria for our choice of topics. For example, we make sure we do not talk
about human genome and human diseases, because everyone finds those topics
useful.

\-------------------------------------------------------

1\. [Bioinformatics](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/)

It is the location of the current blog and the theme will continue to be the
same - hardware, bioinformatics algorithms, codes. To keep majority of
bioinformatics technicians away from our blog, we will reduce the discussions
on how to run programs and how to set up standard pipelines to an absolute
minimum.

\-------------------------------------------------------

2\. [Programming](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/software/)

This study section will cover topics on web-related tools, frameworks,
Javascript, CSS etc. We have gotten feedback that python is everyone's
favorite language and PHP is not liked at all. Therefore, most of our
discussions will be on PHP, but we will sprinkle python once in a while to
give the impression that our heart changed.

\-------------------------------------------------------

3\. [RNAseq/Transcriptomics](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/rnaseq/)

This study section is currently empty, but we plan to move some of our RNAseq
/transcriptomics-related discussions there. We do not know what else to add to
drive everyone away. Microarrays?

\-------------------------------------------------------

4\. [Jobs](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/jobs/)

One redeeming quality of our 'jobs' study section is that it has almost no job
posted. Feel free to let us know, if you have an opening for a
bioinformatician. If [the job requirements are truly outrageous](http://kevin-
gattaca.blogspot.com/2011/11/employment-ads-do-you-have-mad-ngs.html), we will
post it right away.

\-------------------------------------------------------

5\. [In Press](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/press-release/)

We are increasingly getting requests from companies to post their standard
press releases. [If those releases are truly
satirical](http://thescienceweb.wordpress.com/2014/04/08/satirical-news-site-
genomeweb-set-to-close/), we can post them in our main blog. Otherwise, the
'in press' study section will cover them with a link on our front-page.

\-------------------------------------------------------

6\. [Evolution and ncRNA](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/ncrna/)

What is life? Where do animals, plants and other living organisms on earth
come from and how do they grow and evolve? The topic interests nobody and
therefore we decided to hide those discussions here. Subtopics - (i) RNA
world, (ii) Hox/parahox genes, (iii) evolution of immune system in bacteria to
vertebrates.

\-------------------------------------------------------

7\. [Plants and Insects](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/plant/)

How do the plants defend themselves against bugs? For some odd reason, we got
interested in latex, laticifers and some other poisonous aspects of plants.
The topics will be covered in this study section, which is currently empty.

\-------------------------------------------------------

8\. [Fish Biology](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/bengal/)

Here we will discuss detailed phylogeny of various fish species and also their
evolutionary specialties. If that appears too interesting, we will cut your
favorite fish, cook it and eat it right in front of your eyes. Yes, this
currently empty study section will include live recipes on dead fish species.

\-------------------------------------------------------

9\. [Chem/Biochem/Protocols](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/chem/)

This study section will discuss chemicals, protocols and CRISPR/cas9 until you
say 'no mas'.

\-------------------------------------------------------

10\. [Social Trends - Academia](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/students/)

Most US universities will get shut down and here we explain why. The following
three topics are discussed most frequently - (i) student debt, (ii) indebted
students and (iii) student loan. You get the drift.

\-------------------------------------------------------

11\. [Social Trends - Global](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/social/)

Lately we have been hearing about a large number of bankers committing
suicide, and the only reason we can think of is that they read the social
section of our blog, now being brought back from 'password-protected' status.

\-------------------------------------------------------

12\. [SEO](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/seo/)

What do you do, when you get angry? Lior Pachter goes after Manolis Kellis,
Dan Graur bashes the ENCODE industry and we take on the formidable SEO
industry. One of our pet peeves is a company called Alexa, which supposedly
ranks all websites and finds that our readers read [the following topics the
most](http://www.alexa.com/siteinfo/homolog.us). So much for 'big data' !!

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2014/04/Capture8-300x188.png)

While investigating on how they could be so wrong, we came across an industry
that is a giant, humongous scam (far bigger than ENCODE). We expect Ewan
Birney to be born as a SEO person in his next life.

