---
title: Benchmarking of Red-colored Bridges
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
While being stuck in traffic at the Golden Gate bridge during my last San
Francisco trip, an idea occurred to me. How about I do some research work to
benchmark all suspension bridges in the world?
<!--more-->

A quick check at Wikipedia gave me [over one hundred candidates](http://en.wik
ipedia.org/wiki/List_of_longest_suspension_bridge_spans), leading me to
restrict my ambitious plan to only the red-colored bridges. That made sense,
because the red colored bridges attract unusually high number of tourists and
therefore should be an ideal subset representing all traffic-heavy suspension
bridges.

After carefully considering all relevant factors, I picked the following
bridges -

1\. [25 de Abril Bridge,
Portugal](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/25_de_Abril_Bridge)

![](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/52/Ponte25Abril1.jpg
/220px-Ponte25Abril1.jpg)

2\. [Xihoumen Bridge, China](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xihoumen_Bridge)

![](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f2/Xihoumen_Bridge_i
n_Zhoushan.jpg/220px-Xihoumen_Bridge_in_Zhoushan.jpg)

3\. [Golden Gate Bridge, San Francisco,
USA](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Golden_Gate_Bridge)

![](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/0c/GoldenGateBridge-
001.jpg/220px-GoldenGateBridge-001.jpg)

4\. [Yichang Bridge, China](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yichang_Bridge)![](ht
tp://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d7/Yichang_Yangtze_Highway
_Bridge_2.jpg/220px-Yichang_Yangtze_Highway_Bridge_2.jpg)

5\. [Hirado Bridge, Nagashaki,
Japan](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hirado_Bridge)

![](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1c/HiradoOhashi.jpg
/220px-HiradoOhashi.jpg)

**Benchmarking Criteria and Funding**

For the purpose of my study, I selected the following criteria. I will drive
on the above bridges through every available access road on three different
days of the week and at three different times during the day - early morning,
midday and later in the evening.

I collected some preliminary data on the Golden Gate bridge accordingly and
applied for a grant from NIH to do benchmarking. The grant application made my
hobby project appear relevant for human health, as you can see from the
introduction -

> Rapid access to medical care is one of the biggest concerns, and overcrowded
bridges and highways can lead to fatality for those patients seeking emergency
treatment. This study will investigate the time of access across the busiest
suspension bridges of the world.

To make the research project even more relevant for human health, I threw in a
few irrelevant and arbitrary observations such as [two of the selected bridges
have the highest suicide
rates](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_suicide_sites). What the heck !!

The project got funded !!

**Finally the Paper**

After completing my study, I wrote a paper and submitted to the most respected
civil engineering journal. All three reviewer agreed about the importance of
my study and replied using one letter technical jargon that I did not
understand.

Reviewer 1: LOL.

Reviewer 2: LOL.

Reviewer 3: LOL.

My civil engineer friend working on construction projects helped me out by
sending me a larger email explanation.

>

Dude,

Just like a computer program moves data from hard-disk to memory and back to
hard-disk, a bridge moves people around. Before constructing a bridge, we
collect extensive amount of field-data, construct a model on expected traffic
flow and design the bridge. That design includes various other factors
including cost and margin of error that you did not pay attention to.

You can surely drive up and down the bridges a few times and write travel
notes about how cold Golden Gate bridge is during mid-summer, but I do not see
what your paper will do to the technical aspect of our field.

I disagree, because as a user, I have a right to benchmark the bridges and as
a researcher, I have a right to publish those result in a scientific journal.
I am wondering whether to pay PLOS One to publish my paper or send it to open
access site homolog.us and save $1350.

**Legal Disclaimer**

The above story is fictitious and is not related to growing number of
bioinformatics papers trying to 'benchmark' various software programs as black
boxes without any discussion about the underlying algorithms.

