---
title: Steven McKnight Identifies the Riff-raffs
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
After ASBMB president Steve McKnight's monthly letter went viral (check
[here](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/10/01/latest-from-steven-
mcknight-on-harvardbroadster-citation-culture/) for links to all three), many
people in social media complained about him being against young scientist.
That is far from true, as he clarified in his [this month's
letter](http://www.asbmb.org/asbmbtoday/201411/PresidentsMessage/) (not that
it needed any clarification) and explained where the riff-raffs come from.
<!--more-->

> Now, at least in academia, an entirely new metric has insidiously
contaminated our enterprise. Instead of perceived capacity to make unique
discoveries being at the very top of the list, this critical premise has begun
to be replaced by fundability. If a job candidate is working in a trendy field
liberally funded by the NIH, such as the ENCODE project, he or she may well be
chosen over a superior candidate. How sad it is to have witnessed this change
over the tenure of my decades as a biomedical researcher.

The rest of his commentary has many similarities with what we discussed in
this blog over the last two years. Too much of central planning has been
damaging science, whereas in the past the process worked from bottom up. Check
our various relevant posts discussing these points.

[DORA Pledge YASI from Government-funded
Scientists](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/06/12/dora-pledge-yasi-from-
government-funded-scientists/)

[In above post, we discussed about yet another central planning idea to fix
the impact of previous ones related to citations.]

[Government is the Mother of All
Invention](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/06/15/government-is-the-
mother-of-all-invention/)

[A long term history of non-centrally planned part of western science.]

[A Series of Good Ideas](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/12/12/series-
good-ideas/)

[How US science got badly centralized through a series of 'good ideas' since
WW II.]

[Dangerous Central Planners Coming to Rescue US Biomedical
Research](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/04/15/dangerous-central-
planners-coming-to-rescue-us-biomedical-research/)

[Criticism of yet another central planning idea.]

[A Few Thoughts on Reviving Biomedical Research in a Deflationary
Era](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/04/27/a-few-thoughts-on-reviving-
biomedical-research-in-a-deflationary-era/)

[US Science Funding Proposal for a Better
Alternative](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/10/14/us-science-funding-
let-us/)

[US Science Funding Proposal for a Better Alternative (Part
II)](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/10/15/alternative-part-ii/)

[Proposed alternatives. They take into account the fact that purely crowd-
sourced science will be hype-driven, even though it is the society that
ultimately pays for science. On the other hand, leaving everything to the
central planners is self-destructive.]

Getting back to McKnight's letter, he also clearly sees the top-down planning
as a major shift and plans to discuss the alternatives in the coming months.

> When science funding used to be driven in a bottom-up direction, one had
tremendous confidence that a superior grant application would be funded.
Regrettably, this is no longer the case. We instead find ourselves perversely
led by our noses via top-down research directives coming from the NIH in the
form of requests for proposals and all kinds of other programs that instruct
us what to work on instead of asking us what is best.

Given the huge impact of fundability on our scientific workforce, the people
sitting on NIH study sections now exert exceptional influence on our
profession. I am hypersensitive to this situation, and I am simply unwilling
to ignore the quagmire in which we now find ourselves. I may be wrong. Our
system for distributing billions of taxpayer dollars to the biomedical
enterprise may need no tweaking whatsoever. This is a debate; debate is
healthy. Over the next two years, I will be offering my take. I welcome yours!

