---
title: Biological Complexity
categories:
- ncRNA
---
[Link](http://sites.duke.edu/mcshearesearch/)
<!--more-->

> The evolution of complexity without natural selection

Posted on March 20, 2014 by dmcshea@duke.edu

From the introduction to: The evolution of complexity without natural
selection, a large-scale trend of the fourth kind, D. McShea, Paleobiology
(Supplement) 31:146-156.

There may be no marvel greater than the complex functionality of organisms:
the precise coordination of their parts, their reliability in the face of
environmental upset, and their ability to act appropriately in their own
interests. And then there is the sheer number of their parts and part types,
across a range of physical scales, most obvious in the larger multicellular
organisms. These properties together have been aptly called adaptive
complexity, and the apparent increase in the adaptive complexity of organisms
over the history of life is one of the great mysteries of biology. The mystery
is half solved by breaking the notion of adaptive complexity into its two
components, adaptation and complexity, and thinking about them separately.
Notions like coordination, reliability, and appropriate action (from the first
sentence) are all aspects of function, or adaptation. And function or
adaptation in organisms is no mystery at all. Since Darwin, we have had a
perfectly adequate explanation for it, natural selection.

Complexity is another matter. Suppose we do a thought experiment in which we
subtract all aspects of adaptation from our understanding of an organism. In
other words, we put aside everything we know about how the organism functions.
What is left is an assemblage of parts, diverse in their sizes, compositions,
shapes, and orientations with respect to each other. To capture that
diversity, we will call the organism complex, although keep in mind that this
is what you might call pure complexity, divorced from any notion of function.
For complexity in this sense, biology has no satisfactory explanation.
(Continued: Trends of fourth kind-ZFEL)

