---
title: Human Genetics and Clinical Aspects of Neurodevelopmental Disorders
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
The [Reddit AMA of Weiss and Buchanan](http://www.reddit.com/r/science/comment
s/2mnsyh/science_ama_series_we_are_ken_weiss_and_anne/) is full of many
interesting comments and discussions. The highest rating of the following
question suggests that people are coming to realize that the scientists over-
sold and over-hyped what could be achieved through the human genome sequencing
project.
<!--more-->

> **Why hasn't genetics led to the groundbreaking cures initially promised?**

mermaidstale: Basically, because the diseases that most of us will get as we
age turn out to be more complex than people had thought. I think we can blame
the idea that we will find genes 'for' these kinds of diseases on Mendel,
whose work with traits in peas led people to think that most traits were going
to behave in the same predictable way that wrinkled, or yellow, or green peas
do. Instead, it is turning out that there are many pathways to most traits,
usually including many genes and environmental factors as well. So, diseases
won't be as predictable as we've been promised, because everyone's genome is
different, and environmental risk factors are hard to identify (is butter good
or bad for us?), and future environments impossible to predict.

In this context, Gholson Lyon pointed out that he wrote a [book
chapter](http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2014/10/06/000687) that the readers
will find useful. The article is well-researched, well-written and is
available open-access from biorxiv.

> There are ~12 billion nucleotides in every cell of the human body, and there
are ~25-100 trillion cells in each human body. Given somatic mosaicism,
epigenetic changes and environmental differences, no two human beings are the
same, particularly as there are only ~7 billion people on the planet. One of
the next great challenges for studying human genetics will be to acknowledge
and embrace complexity. Every human is unique, and the study of human disease
phenotypes (and phenotypes in general) will be greatly enriched by moving from
a deterministic to a more stochastic/probabilistic model. The dichotomous
distinction between simple and complex diseases is completely artificial, and
we argue instead for a model that considers a spectrum of diseases that are
variably manifesting in each person. The rapid adoption of whole genome
sequencing (WGS) and the Internet-mediated networking of people promise to
yield more insight into this century-old debate. Comprehensive ancestry
tracking and detailed family history data, when combined with WGS or at least
cascade-carrier screening, might eventually facilitate a degree of genetic
prediction for some diseases in the context of their familial and ancestral
etiologies. However, it is important to remain humble, as our current state of
knowledge is not yet sufficient, and in principle, any number of nucleotides
in the genome, if mutated or modified in a certain way and at a certain time
and place, might influence some phenotype during embryogenesis or postnatal
life.

