---
title: First Human Bioinformatician Criticizes Bad Science of NIH-funded Bigshots,
  Disappears
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
In the comment section of [an earlier
post](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/10/27/several-flaws-in-ewan-
birneys-description-of-publicly-funded-science/), reader Jonathan Badger
criticized us by saying -
<!--more-->

> Even if you think ENCODE was a waste, do you seriously think cutting
scientific funding in general is the answer? Its like the Metro (subway)
scandal in the Washington, DC area. The Metro has had a lot of mishaps lately,
but cutting its government funding (as some neocon politicans have suggested)
isnt going help matters.

The problem is that increased funding of a centralized bureaucracy is not
equivalent to supporting basic science. The action actually hurts basic
science rather than helping it, and the following one is a good example (apart
from [Dan Graur losing his funding for criticizing
ENCODE](http://judgestarling.tumblr.com/post/97259387131/eric-green-funding-
authorship-integrity-and-an)).

Everyone working on eukaryotic and especially mammalian translation knows
about [Kozak consensus
sequence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kozak_consensus_sequence). They do not
learn what happened to Marilyn Kozak for protesting against bad science of
NIH-funded bigshots. She had been 'disappeared'. This story also shows the
decay taking place in many formerly well-respected universities.

[Marilyn Kozak](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marilyn_Kozak) is (was?) a
remarkable scientist. Her PhD adviser Daniel Nathans mentioned her work in
[his Nobel prize
lecture](http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/medicine/laureates/1978
/nathans-bio.html). As a young professor, she chose a problem that was thought
to be already solved years before and came up with the discovery of "Kozak
sequence" using method that is now known as 'bioinformatics'. Her experimental
papers were equally impressive, and she was the single author on many of her
highly cited papers.

> In her original faculty job proposal, she sought to study the mechanism of
Eukaryotic translation initiation, a problem long thought to have already been
solved by Joan Steitz. [3] While in the Department of Biological Sciences at
University of Pittsburgh, she published a series of work that would establish
the scanning model of translation initiation and the Kozak consensus sequence.

[The Scientist magazine featured her among the top 10 women scientists of the
80s](http://www.the-
scientist.com/?articles.view/articleNo/11393/title/Research--Top-10-Women-
Scientists-Of-The--80s--Making-A-Difference/) for her highly cited work.

> Joan A. Steitz and Marilyn S. Kozak, ranked fifth and sixth, respectively,
are both biochemists.

Kozak, with more than 3,100 citations during the period 1981 to 1988, teaches
at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey in Newark. She is
also involved in research that concerns mRNA and eukaryotes. In her most cited
paper, which appeared in Nucleic Acids Research in 1984, she noted that as of
1981 scientists were aware of about only 32 cellular mRNA sequences in
addition to those she had compiled for a 1981 paper (Current Topics in
Microbiology and Immunology, 93:81-123, 1981). In her 1984 paper, however,
Kozak noted that researchers had identified a total of 166an indication of the
rapid growth in this field.

Kozak was a highly respected human geneticist, and that later turned out to be
her biggest problem. Since 2000, NIH started to push huge amounts of money to
study the 'human genome'. One of the fashionable ideas was [IRES (internal
ribosome entry
site)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internal_ribosome_entry_site) mechanism
discovered in viral genomes, but the money was in 'going human'. Unfortunately
(for Kozak), she questioned the integrity of science in many IRES papers
making big claims.

Kozak's lab was defunded by NIH, and she seem to have completely disappeared.
The university email given in her papers bounces, even though [Rutgers lists
her among the faculty members](http://rwjms.rutgers.edu/education/gsbs/program
s/biochem/faculty/index.html). The current condition of her department at
Rutgers is equally tragic. We called the administrative number to find her
latest contact information, but the person responding seemed to never have
heard of her. We also tried to contact other professors from the
["Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Program"](http://rwjms.rutgers.edu/educat
ion/gsbs/programs/biochem/faculty/index.html) page of Rutgers, but most links
go nowhere. [The top page of RWJMS](http://rwjms.rutgers.edu/) is equally
uninformative about the list of faculty members. After 10 minutes of
struggling through the links, we came to these two pages giving us a snapshot
of the biochemistry and molecular biology department. In summary, the
department now has three times as many 'voluntary faculty' (euphemism for
unpaid adjunct PhD) as 'faculty'. We post the full list of former group below.

[Faculty directory](http://rwjms.rutgers.edu/departments_institutes/molecular_
biochemistry/faculty/index.html)

['Voluntary faculty'](http://rwjms.rutgers.edu/departments_institutes/molecula
r_biochemistry/faculty/volunteer_faculty.html)

> Sefik Alkan

Ph.D. Adjunct Professor

Edward Arnold

Ph.D. Adjunct Professor

Steven Brill

Ph.D. Adjunct Professor

Dalia Cohen

Ph.D. Adjunct Professor

Lori Covey

Ph.D. Adjunct Associate Professor

Jonathan Dinman

Ph.D. Adjunct Associate Professor

Leonard Edelstein

Ph.D. Adjunct Assistant Professor

Arthur Felix

Ph.D. Adjunct Professor

Gianni Garotta

Ph.D. Adjunct Professor

Raymond Habas

Ph.D. Adjunct Associate Professor

Florence Kimball

Ph.D. Adjunct Associate Professor

Christopher Krause

Ph.D. Adjunct Assistant Professor

Michael Leibowitz

M.D., Ph.D. Adjunct Professor

Ronald Levy

Ph.D. Adjunct Professor

King-Teh Lin

Ph.D. Adjunct Instructor

George Mark, III

Ph.D. Adjunct Professor

Fred Mermelstein

Ph.D. Adjunct Assistant Professor

Oleg Mermelstein

Ph.D. Adjunct Assistant Professor

Michael Newlon

Ph.D. Adjunct Associate Professor

Nicola Partridge

Ph.D. Adjunct Professor

Stuart Peltz

Ph.D. Adjunct Professor

Margaret Prescott

Ph.D. Adjunct Assistant Professor

Abbas Rashidbaigi

Ph.D. Adjunct Assistant Professor

Danny Reinberg

Ph.D. Adjunct Professor

Srijata Sarkar

Ph.D. Adjunct Assistant Professor

Gertrud Schupbach

Ph.D. Adjunct Professor

John Siekierka

Ph.D. Adjunct Assistant Professor

Victor Stollar

M.D. Adjunct Professor

Yuh-Hwa Wang

Ph.D. Adjunct Associate Professor

Lawrence Wennogle

Ph.D. Adjunct Assistant Professor

Eric Wieschaus

Ph.D. Adjunct Professor

Robert Zhao

M.D.,Ph.D. Adjunct Professor

In the rest of blogosphere, we found [this nice comment from
2007](http://bayblab.blogspot.com/2007/12/marilyn-kozak-professional-
critic.html) describing Kozak.

> I was lucky enough to take a class with Marilyn Kozak last year.

I'd known a little bit about IRES's, and in fact had been starting to design
uses for them in my own lab work. One of the first things we did in Kozak's
class was discuss the evidence for IRES's.

At the end of the end of the discussion, I agreed with her that there is no
solid evidence for IRES's. She was not saying that they don't exist, however,
the "evidence" for them looks incredibly sloppy. It should look sloppy to
anyone who has not convinced themselves that they definitely exist, and won't
see anything else.

In terms of Marilyn being "antisocial", she is anything but. How many times
have you read an article in a journal, looked at the results, and gone, "they
published THIS crap?!" I know I do it on a regular basis, and I don't have
half the reasoning capability and background that Marilyn does. Being asked to
review papers written by people who should know better making unfounded
conclusions from their data would probably frustrate many people.

I think people who don't appreciate Marilyn's criticism are close-minded
individuals who shouldn't call themselves scientists. It's one thing to not
agree with what she says, but to get annoyed at her for raising any questions
or bringing up any criticism is lame. What's the point of peer review except
to get feedback and criticism?

And Bayman, was there anything in your comment that was supposed to convince
us of the presence of IRES's? The presence of poly A tracts? That's it?

