---
title: Eukaryogenesis, How Special Really?
categories:
- ncRNA
---
[Link](http://www.pnas.org/content/early/2015/04/15/1421376112.full.pdf)
<!--more-->

> Eukaryogenesis is widely viewed as an improbable evolutionary transition
uniquely affecting the evolution of life on this planet. However, scientific
and popular rhetoric extolling this event as a singularity lacks rigorous
evidential and statistical support. Here, we question several of the usual
claims about the specialness of eukaryogenesis, focusing on both
eukaryogenesis as a process and its outcome, the eukaryotic cell. We argue in
favor of four ideas. First, the criteria by which we judge eukaryogenesis to
have required a genuinely unlikely series of events 2 billion years in the
making are being eroded by discoveries that fill in the gaps of the
prokaryote:eukaryote discontinuity. Second, eukaryogenesis confronts
evolutionary theory in ways not different from other evolutionary transitions
in individuality; parallel systems can be found at several hierarchical
levels. Third, identifying which of several complex cellular features confer
on eukaryotes a putative richer evolutionary potential remains an area of
speculation: various keys to success have been proposed and rejected over the
five-decade history of research in this area. Fourth, and perhaps most
importantly, it is difficult and may be impossible to eliminate eukaryocentric
bias from the measures by which eukaryotes as a whole are judged to have
achieved greater success than prokaryotes as a whole. Overall, we question
whether premises of existing theories about the uniqueness of eukaryogenesis
and the greater evolutionary potential of eukaryotes have been objectively
formulated and whether, despite widespread acceptance that eukaryogenesis was
special, any such notion has more than rhetorical value.

