---
title: On The Evolution of Noggin Gene
categories:
- ncRNA
---
**In hydra -**
<!--more-->

[Cloning of noggin gene from hydra and analysis of its functional conservation
using Xenopus laevis embryos](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20565537)

> Hydra, a member of phylum Cnidaria that arose early in evolution, is endowed
with a defined axis, organized nervous system, and active behavior. It is a
powerful model system for the elucidation of evolution of developmental
mechanisms in animals. Here, we describe the identification and cloning of
noggin-like gene from hydra. Noggin is a secreted protein involved at multiple
stages of vertebrate embryonic development including neural induction and is
known to exert its effects by inhibiting the bone morphogenetic protein
(BMP)-signaling pathway. Sequence analysis revealed that hydra Noggin shows
considerable similarity with its orthologs at the amino acid level. When
microinjected in the early Xenopus embryos, hydra noggin mRNA induced a
secondary axis in 100% of the injected embryos, demonstrating functional
conservation of hydra noggin in vertebrates. This was further confirmed by the
partial rescue of Xenopus embryos by hydra noggin mRNA from UV-induced
ventralization. By using animal cap assay in Xenopus embryos, we demonstrate
that these effects of hydra noggin in Xenopus embryos are because of
inhibition of BMP signaling by Noggin. Our data indicate that BMP/Noggin
antagonism predates the bilaterian divergence and is conserved during the
evolution.

**In zebrafish (less interesting from evolutionary perspective) -**

[Three different noggin genes antagonize the activity of bone morphogenetic
proteins in the zebrafish embryo](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10491267)

> The dorsoventral polarity of the vertebrate embryo is established through
interactions between ventrally expressed bone morphogenetic proteins and their
organizer-borne antagonists Noggin, Chordin, and Follistatin. While the
opposing interactions between Short Gastrulation/Chordin and
Decapentaplegic/BMP4 have been evolutionarily conserved in arthropods and
vertebrates, there has been up to now no functional evidence of an implication
of Noggin in the early patterning of organisms other than Xenopus. We have
studied the contribution of Noggin to the embryonic development of the
zebrafish. While single-copy noggin genes have been characterized in several
vertebrate species, we report that the zebrafish genome harbors three noggin
homologues. Overexpression experiments show that Noggin1, Noggin2, and Noggin3
can antagonize ventralizing BMPs. While all three factors have similar
biological activities, their embryonic expression is different. The combined
expression of the three genes recapitulates the different aspects of the
expression of the single-copy noggin genes of other organisms. This suggests
that the three zebrafish noggin genes and the single noggin genes of other
vertebrates have evolved from a common ancestor and that subsequent
differential loss of tissue-specific elements in the promoters of the
different zebrafish genes accounts for their more restricted spatiotemporal
expression. Finally we show that noggin1 is expressed in the fish organizer
and able to dorsalize the embryo, suggesting its implication in the
dorsoventral patterning of the zebrafish.

