---
title: The Two-domain Tree of Life is linked to a New Root for the Archaea
categories:
- ncRNA
---
Readers will find [this phylogeny
paper](http://www.pnas.org/content/112/21/6670) on archaea interesting. The
implications are further discussed by Baross and Martin in the second paper
posted below. (h/t: Erich Schwarz)
<!--more-->

> An archaeal origin for eukaryotes is an exciting recent finding.
Nevertheless, it has been based largely on the reconstruction of universal
trees. The use of an alternative strategy based on markers shared between
Archaea and eukaryotes and Archaea and Bacteria bypasses potential problems
linked to the analysis of the three domains simultaneously. Comparison of the
phylogenies obtained by these two complementary sets of markers supports a
sister relationship between eukaryotes and the Thaumarchaeota/Aigarchaeota
(candidate phylum)/Crenarchaeota/Korarchaeota lineage but also robustly
indicates a root of the tree of Archaea that challenges the traditional
topology of this domain. This sensibly changes our perspective of the ancient
evolution of the Archaea, early life, and Earth.

John Baross and Bill Martin reviewed the implications of the above discovery -

[The Ribofilm as a Concept for Life's Origins](The Ribofilm as a Concept for
Life's Origins)

> Recent phylogenetic data indicating that the first archaea were methane-
producing galvanizes cross-disciplinary evidence supporting the hypothesis
that life arose via thermodynamically directed events at hydrothermal vents.
The new developments lead us to propose the concept of a ribofilm in which
RNA's origin-of-life role is more akin to a slowly changing platform than a
spontaneous self-replicator.

