---
title: Adaptive Immunity - Connecting Evolutionary Dots from Bacteria to Mammals
categories:
- ncRNA
---
[This](http://www.nature.com/nrg/journal/v16/n3/abs/nrg3859.html) is quite a
fascinating paper (h/t: @suryasaha). Here Koonin is connecting the
evolutionary dots from bacterial immune system all the way to V(D)J.
<!--more-->

For those who do not know, Eugene Koonin's group predicted the existence of
CRISPR-cas immune system [in 2005 using bioinformatics
methods](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/chem/2014/03/26/crispr-cas-evolution-of-
an-rna-based-adaptive-immunity-system-in-prokaryotes/) [also check - Makarova,
K. S. et al. A putative RNA-interference based immune system in prokaryotes:
computational analysis of the predicted enzymatic machinery, functional
analogies with eukaryotic RNAi, and hypothetical mechanisms of action. Biol.
Direct 1, 7 (2006).]. That was a year before [Barrangou published his
experimental paper](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/chem/2014/03/24/saving-
bacteria-from-diseases-and-the-cas9-crispr-revolution/) and five years before
George Church decided to call himself the inventor and applied for patent.

> Adaptive immune systems in prokaryotes and animals give rise to long-term
memory through modification of specific genomic loci, such as by insertion of
foreign (viral or plasmid) DNA fragments into clustered regularly interspaced
short palindromic repeat (CRISPR) loci in prokaryotes and by V(D)J
recombination of immunoglobulin genes in vertebrates. Strikingly, recombinases
derived from unrelated mobile genetic elements have essential roles in both
prokaryotic and vertebrate adaptive immune systems. Mobile elements, which are
ubiquitous in cellular life forms, provide the only known, naturally evolved
tools for genome engineering that are successfully adopted by both innate
immune systems and genome-editing technologies. In this Opinion article, we
present a general scenario for the origin of adaptive immunity from mobile
elements and innate immune systems.

