---
title: 'Metagenomics: Tools and Insights for Analyzing Next-Generation Sequencing
  Data Derived from Biodiversity Studies'
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
We have been looking for a summary of all tools and techniques being used
currently for metagenome analysis, and found the following one very
informative and up to date (apart from including Ruibang's MEGAhit).
<!--more-->

Posting the [Link](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4426941/) for
others -

> Advances in next-generation sequencing (NGS) have allowed significant
breakthroughs in microbial ecology studies. This has led to the rapid
expansion of research in the field and the establishment of metagenomics,
often defined as the analysis of DNA from microbial communities in
environmental samples without prior need for culturing. Many metagenomics
statistical/computational tools and databases have been developed in order to
allow the exploitation of the huge influx of data. In this review article, we
provide an overview of the sequencing technologies and how they are uniquely
suited to various types of metagenomic studies. We focus on the currently
available bioinformatics techniques, tools, and methodologies for performing
each individual step of a typical metagenomic dataset analysis. We also
provide future trends in the field with respect to tools and technologies
currently under development. Moreover, we discuss data management,
distribution, and integration tools that are capable of performing comparative
metagenomic analyses of multiple datasets using well-established databases, as
well as commonly used annotation standards.

