---
title: Turkey and Thanksgiving
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Prior to thanksgiving, people are looking for -
<!--more-->

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/11/Capture5-300x68.jpg)

\------------------------------------------

On the first topic, the following story came on the top. It is noteworthy for
what passes as 'science' this days (shown in emphasis below).

[Brining turkey is the worst, according to science](Brining turkey is the
worst, according to science)

> As BuzzFeed showed in a **13-person taste test**, a brined turkey may be
moist, but it is also flavorless and boring. The skin doesnt crisp. The taste
doesnt wow. But that leaves home chefs with a problem: How do you get a turkey
that is both juicy and flavorful?

\-------------------------------------------

On the third topic -

[Turkish Shootdown of Russian Jet: What You Need to
Know](http://www.washingtonsblog.com/2015/11/must-know-facts-turkish-
shootdown-russian-jet.html)

A U.S. official [told](http://news.yahoo.com/russian-jet-hit-inside-syria-
incursion-turkey-u-010811956.html) Reuters that the Russian jet was _inside_
_of Syria_ when it was shot down:

>

The United States believes that the Russian jet shot down by Turkey on Tuesday
was hit inside Syrian airspace after a brief incursion into Turkish airspace,
a U.S. official told Reuters, speaking on condition of anonymity.

Russia [denies](http://news.yahoo.com/warplane-crashes-syria-near-turkish-
border-haberturk-tv-074131995.html) that the Russian fighter jet which was
bombing ISIS ever entered Turkish air space, and has put out its [own
map](http://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2015/nov/24/russian-jet-downed-by-
turkish-planes-near-syrian-border-live-updates#block-5654b6d8e4b0f4d54c31afdb)
purporting to prove that claim.

The Russian jet pilots who parachutted free of their burning plane were then
purportedly [killed by Turkish rebels](http://news.yahoo.com/turkmen-forces-
syria-shot-dead-pilots-downed-russian-143818517.html) inside Syria. If true,
this is a war crime.

Then when a Russian helicopter tried to save the pilots _it_ was shot down by
[American-backed Syrian rebels](http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/world-news
/russian-rescue-helicopter-shot-down-6891003) using weapons provided to them
[by the United States ](http://www.dailystar.co.uk/news/latest-news/477404/US-
nti-tank-gun-used-by-jihadis-against-Russian-chopper) and a Russian marine
[was killed](http://sputniknews.com/world/20151124/1030686711/su24-rescue-
syria-russia.html).

Russia is [deploying a warship off the Syrian coast to destroy any
threats](https://www.rt.com/news/323329-russia-suspend-military-turkey/) to
Russian planes. [Many believe](http://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/world-war-
iii-trends-twitter-putin-decries-turkeys-stab-back-n468881) this is the [start
of World War III.](http://original.antiwar.com/justin/2015/11/24/turkeys-stab-
in-the-back/)

While the U.S. and NATO tried to blame Russia, German Vice-Chancellor Sigmar
Gabriel [slammed](https://www.rt.com/news/323240-russia-turkey-warplane-
downed/) Turkey:

> This incident shows for the first time that we are to dealing with an actor
who is unpredictable according to statements from various parts of the region
that is not Russia, that is Turkey, Gabriel said, as cited by DPA news agency.
He added that Turkey was playing a complicated role in the Syrian conflict.

Indeed, NATO-member Turkey is [MASSIVELY supporting
ISIS](http://www.washingtonsblog.com/2015/08/usa-turkey-and-israel-act-as-air-
force-for-isis.html), [provided chemical
weapons](http://www.washingtonsblog.com/2015/10/2-turkish-parliament-members-
turkey-provided-chemical-weapons-for-syrian-terrorist-attack.html) used in the
jihadis massacre of civilians, and has been bombing [ISIS main on-the-ground
enemy Kurdish soldiers using its air
force](http://www.washingtonsblog.com/2015/07/nato-member-busted-massively-
supporting-isis-now-declares-war-against-isis-but-has-ulterior-motives.html).
And some of the Turkish people are also [unsympathetic to the
victims](https://www.rt.com/sport/322604-turkish-fans-minute-silence/) of ISIS
terrorism.Turkey was also instrumental in the creation of ISIS. An internal
Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) document produced recently shows, the U.S.
knew that the actions of the West, Gulf countries and **Turkey** in Syria
[might create a terrorist group like ISIS and an Islamic
CALIPHATE](http://www.washingtonsblog.com/2015/05/newly-declassified-u-s
-government-documents-the-west-supported-the-creation-of-isis.html).

As the former DIA head [explained](http://www.washingtonsblog.com/2015/08/u-s
-defense-intelligence-agency-head-it-was-a-willful-decision-by-america-to-
support-an-insurgency-that-had-salafists-al-qaeda-and-the-muslim-
brotherhood.html):

> It was a **willful decision** [by Turkey, the West and Gulf countries] to
support an insurgency that had salafists, Al Qaeda and the Muslim Brotherhood
.

> It was a willful decision [by Turkey, the West and Gulf countries] to
support an insurgency that had salafists, Al Qaeda and the Muslim Brotherhood
.

\-------------------------------------------

On link between Thanksgiving Turkey and the country Turkey, here is an
interesting factoid - The bird is called 'hindi' (means Indian) in Turkey.

[The Mistake That Gave Turkey (the Bird) the Same Name as Turkey (the
Nation)](http://blog.dictionary.com/turkey/)

> The former center of the Ottoman Empire isnt exactly a breeding ground for
the bird that Americans associate with Thanksgiving. In fact, the turkey is
native to North America, so why do they share the same name?

First, lets get the facts on the two turkeys. The word turkey has been used to
refer to land occupied by the Turks since the 1300s and was even used by
Chaucer in The Book of the Duchess. The word Turk is of unknown origin, but it
is used in such varying languages as Italian, Arabic, Persian, and many others
to refer to people from this region. The land occupied by the Turks was known
as the Ottoman Empire from the 1300s until 1922. Following World War I and the
fall of the Ottomans, the republic of Turkey was declared, taking on the name
that had long referred to that region. The bird is another story. Meleagris
gallopavo is an odd-looking bird that is known for its bare head, wattle, and
iridescent plumage.

How are they related? First, we have to get to know another bird: the guinea
fowl. This bird bears some resemblance to the then-recently found American
bird. Though it is native to eastern Africa, the guinea fowl was imported to
Europe through the Ottoman Empire and came to be called the turkey-cock or
turkey-hen. When settlers in the New World began to send similar-looking fowl
back to Europe, they were mistakenly called turkeys.

Every language seems to have radically different names for this bird. The
Turkish word is hindi, which literally means Indian. The original word in
French, coq dInde, meant rooster of India, and has since shortened to dinde.
These names likely derive from the common misconception that India and the New
World were one and the same. In Portuguese, its literally a Peru bird, and in
Malay, its called a Dutch chicken.

The turkeys acceptance into the Old World happened quickly. By 1575, the
English were enjoying the North American bird at Christmas dinner, and
Shakespeare talked about it in Henry IV. Turkeys, as we know them, have fared
better than their guinea fowl relatives on the international scene, perhaps
explaining why you probably have never heard of guinea fowl until right now.

![Ill-have-Turkey](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/Ill-
have-Turkey-236x300.jpg)

