---
title: Poor People Need to Provide Bank Statements to Publish in PLoS
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Adam Eyre-Walker is [an accomplished evolutionary
biologist](http://www.lifesci.sussex.ac.uk/home/Adam_Eyre-
Walker/Website/Publications.html), a breed of scientists out of favor in these
days of NHGRI-dominated ENCODE big-data 'science'. He did not receive any
grant for about ten years and essentially self funds his science.
<!--more-->

However, stating that is not enough for money-hungry open-access journal PLoS,
whose CEO earns over 500K. The journal now wants him to send bank statements
of personal accounts to prove that he is really poor.

Oh well. He should feel grateful that he is mistreated by a journal that
considers [increasing diversity among academic editors and advisory board
members as the most important problem in the
world](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/01/25/working-to-increase-
diversity-of-plos-biology-academic-editors-and-advisory-board-members/). It
could have been far worse (such as getting his work published somewhere else).

**PUBLIC LIBRARY OF SCIENCE (PLOS) FEE WAIVERS**

> 05/01/2015

Public Library of Science (PLoS) fee waivers

Over the last few years Ive published quite a few papers in PLoS journals. In
almost all cases I have been lucky enough to receive a complete or partial fee
waiver because Ive had almost no grant support for the last ten years. I have
been very grateful for this support. Unfortunately times have changed.
Previously you simply had to assert that you did not have the funds to pay the
publication charge and you were granted waiver. Now you to prove that you dont
have the funds and this includes proving that you cannot personally pay the
publication fee this requires you to submit back statements and explain where
your money is being spent. I was quite shocked when I found this out recently
(and if you dont believe me, see the attached email exchange below). Besides
the obvious invasion of privacy, I have to ask myself whether the paper, which
I want to publish, is worth the 650 ($1000) that I would need to get it into
print (assuming of course that it gets accepted)? Why am I publishing it
anyway? Is it to advance science or simply the careers of me and my co-
authors? If it is the latter then it seems reasonable for me to pay, but if it
is an attempt to advance science and knowledge then Im not so sure I should be
paying. And yes, I could pay for this paper to be published, but I couldnt pay
for every paper I write; this would amount to several thousand pounds/dollars
a year, which would comprise a serious chunk of my salary. This policy, of
expecting an author to pay, seems contrary to the original PLoS One policy of
publishing all science and could distort the science that is being published.

Email exchange (I have removed the identity of my correspondee and replaced
their name with PLOS):

\-----------------------------------

**PLOS:**

Dear Dr. Eyre-Walker,

Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS and applying for Publication
Fee Assistance.

You indicated that you will be sending supporting financial documentation with
your application. We have not yet received these supporting documents.
Examples include grant award with budget information, signed letterhead from
your institutional official with funding and budget details, expired grant
award information, personal financial statements or other financial
documentations that support your financial hardship explanations.

Please send them as soon as possible so we can append them to your
application.

Should we receive insufficient evidence to verify demonstrated financial
hardship, we will not be able to approve your PFA application. We will keep
your application open until 1/2 Please send them as soon as possible to
PFA@plos.org

Kind regards,

PLOS

\--------------------------

**Me:**

Dear PLOS

I'm not sure what form this supporting information should take, given that I
have no grants. The last time I was funded by a grant was 2009. Since then I
have had two students funded by UK research councils and two Marie Curie
fellows funded by the European Community, but I receive no funds outside those
associated with these projects - the paper I have submitted to PLoS One was
written with two undergraduate students. The only evidence I can offer of this
lack of grants is the lack of grant acknowledgements in papers I have
published in the last few years. A full list of my publications including PDFs
can be found at http://www.lifesci.susx.ac.uk/home/Adam_Eyre-
Walker/Website/Publications.html and my current CV, with a list of my past
funding, is attached.

I fully appreciate that PLoS One needs money to function, and I am also very
grateful for the complete and partial fee waivers that PLoS has given me in
the past, but I simply have no funds.

Yours sincerely

Adam Eyre-Walker

\-----------------------------

**PLOS:**

Dear Dr. Eyre-Walker,

Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS and applying for Publication
Fee Assistance. We have received your signed self-attestation, but need
additional supporting documentation to validate your financial hardship. Our
former system of granting waivers has been replaced by a formal application
process and we appreciate your assistance in demonstrating your financial
hardship.

Please provide supporting financial documents (e.g. grant and remaining grant
balances, bank statements) to help us determine your financial assistance.
Send us your information by 1/2. Without financial documents, we can only
extend you a 20% fee waiver. Please advise.

Should we receive insufficient evidence to verify demonstrated financial
hardship, we will not be able to approve the PFA assistance amount requested.
We appreciate your assistance in demonstrating your financial need.

Kind regards,

PLOS

\---------------------------

**Me:**

Dear PLOS

I cannot provide a grant statement for a grant that ended over 5 years ago;
the university changed their accounting system and terminated grants were not
transferred. Furthermore, neither this grant, nor any other grant I have ever
had, would provide support for this project, which is unrelated to any of my
former research (except for one paper published by PLoS Biology, which was
incidentally granted a full waiver).

You suggest that I should provide details of my personal financial position
and from this I presume from this that if I am judged to be personally wealthy
enough, then I will be required to pay the publication fee. Is this the case?

Best wishes

Adam

\-----------------------------

**PLOS:**

Dear Adam,

Thank you for your message. Yes, we do require that you send financial
documentation of your hardship. Publication Fee Assistance program launched in
April 2014 and is a new financial assistance program that replaces our old
system of granting waivers with a formal application. We appreciate your help
in demonstrating your financial situation so that we can ensure the assistance
is granted to authors with a demonstrated need. Without financial documents,
we can only extend you a 20% fee waiver. Please advise.

Kind Regards,

PLOS

\--------------------------------------

**Me (I have merged two emails here):**

Dear PLOS

Since my case seems to depend upon my own personal finances I was wondering if
you could tell me how these are judged. How small does my bank balance have to
be before I am judged to be personally unable to pay?

I was also wondering whether these policies regarding fee waivers are being
applied universally across all PLoS journals, or whether each journal has its
won policies.

Thanks

Adam

\--------------------------------

**PLOS:**

Dear Adam,

We apply the same criteria for the PFA application across all journals. There
is no minimum, however the purpose is for you to help us understand your
financial hardship. Others have shown documentation on what they are making
payments towards which puts a strain on their personal budget. Either is
acceptable to help us demonstrate your financial need in greater detail.

Kind Regards,

PLOS

