---
title: Peak Sequencing Consequence? - BGI Delays Launch of &lsquo;Nation-scale&rsquo;
  Sequencer
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
In June, we reported about BGI's announcement of 'Nation-scale' sequencer
([Peak Sequencing? BGI Unveils Nation-scale
Sequencer](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/06/09/peak-sequencing-bgi-
unveils-nation-scale-sequencer/)) and commented -
<!--more-->

> it clearly looks like the society is reaching peak sequencing and should
invest in other components of medical science.

Not so surprisingly, BGI possibly came to the same conclusion five months
later and decided to delay the launch of its mega-sequencer to expedite their
desktop version. Surprised BIO-IT World reports -

[Complete Genomics Loses Staff, Delays Revolocity as BGI Seeks Support for
BGISEQ-500](http://www.bio-itworld.com/2015/11/24/complete-genomics-loses-
staff-delays-revolocity-bgi-seeks-support-bgiseq-500.html)

> Complete Genomics of Mountain View, Calif., is undergoing a big shakeup
under the direction of its Shenzhen-based owner BGI, Julia Karow reports at
GenomeWeb. The company, once the largest sequencing-as-a-service provider in
the U.S., will lay off what Karow reports is a substantial number of employees
and refocus its R&D; efforts in support of BGIs new BGISEQ-500 sequencer,
revealed last month at the International Conference on Genomics.

The reorganization comes at a surprising time, as Complete Genomics was in the
midst of its own product launch, of the ultra-high-throughput Revolocity
sequencing system. Three customers, pursuing large-scale whole genome
sequencing for patient care, had announced their purchases of the system, at a
price of $12 million each. Complete Genomics was preparing to install these
Revolocity systems, each a miniature sequencing factory unto itself, in early
2016.

Now these installations will be delayed, and there is no indication of when or
if the contracts can be honored.

As recently as one month ago, Complete Genomics CEO Cliff Reid spoke to Bio-IT
World about his plans for Revolocity, and the efforts his company had gone
through to reinvent itself as a commercial manufacturer. What [BGI] needed
from us was to be a packaged product supplier, Reid said at the time,
referring to his pivot away from sequencing-as-a-service after his companys
acquisition in 2013. So it accelerated our move from a pure services business
to being able to distribute our technology globally, and it caused us to go
through some major packaging processes.

