---
title: The Future of Work and Asynchronous Teams
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
The book [The Year Without Pants: WordPress.com and the Future of
Work](http://www.amazon.com/The-Year-Without-Pants-WordPress-
com/dp/1118660633) has a nice description wordpress culture and distributed
team.
<!--more-->

> A behind-the-scenes look at the firm behind WordPress.com and the unique
work culture that contributes to its phenomenal success 50 million websites,
or twenty percent of the entire web, use WordPress software. The force behind
WordPress.com is a convention-defying company called Automattic, Inc., whose
120 employees work from anywhere in the world they wish, barely use email, and
launch improvements to their products dozens of times a day. With a fraction
of the resources of Google, Amazon, or Facebook, they have a similar impact on
the future of the Internet. How is this possible? What's different about how
they work, and what can other companies learn from their methods?

The github post [linked here](https://github.com/maxogden/async-
team/blob/master/readme.md) is along the same line. It is an academic (grant-
funded) project described as "Dat is an open source project that provides a
streaming interface between every file format and data storage backend".

Key points -

Stuff used everyday - github, irccloud (for irc discussion)

Stuff used a few times a week - slack (for occasional private discussion, such
as paycheck), screenhero (to share screen), google hangout

Stuff not used consciously - email

On importance of travel and face-to-face meeting

> Note that there are a lot of people who write about remote working on the
internet, and this does not claim to be authoritative on the subject, I am
just sharing what works for us.

Everyone on our team lives in a different city, and we are in many different
time zones. Choosing when and where we work is great for a while, but it's
also nice to balance that out with intense periods of face-time. We try to
meet up 6 times a year for between 2 and 4 weeks at a time and hack in-person.
These trips are not mandatory, and there are no quotas, but we like to
encourage these 'hacker visitations' as much as possible.

We generally rent a whole apartment on AirBNB and house 1-2 out of towners
there, and pick a location where one of the other team members lives so they
can be the local guide. I'm actually currently writing this from a pancake
restauraunt in Taipei, which is an excellent city for remote working due to
it's low cost and large number of cafes. Nobody from our team lives here, but
two of us who normally live in different cities are currently visiting and
working together here.

