---
title: Metagenome Sequencing Finds Strange Biology in  >15% Bacteria
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
A few days back, we wrote a number of posts
([here](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/06/03/the-most-difficult-
problem-in-computational-biology/),
[here](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/06/12/where-does-the-genetic-
code-come-from-twelve-fundamental-problems-for-bioinformatics/)) on the origin
of ribosome and genetic code. Those working on the problem got a big surprise
from a new metagenome sequencing of bacterial species (h/t: @dangraur). The
authors found that the genomes of >15% of Bacteria differed from well-accepted
universal conserved features -
<!--more-->

> CPR organisms often have self-splicing introns and proteins encoded within
their rRNA genes, a feature rarely reported in bacteria. Furthermore, they
have unusual ribosome compositions. All are missing a ribosomal protein often
absent in symbionts, and specific lineages are missing ribosomal proteins and
biogenesis factors considered universal in bacteria.

That certainly does not seem like a big break on the origin of genetic code
itself, but given the high abundance of the newly discovered organisms (>15%),
it is quite possible that our current understanding of the microbial world is
based on a tiny subset of what is out there in nature.

\-----------------------------------

[Unusual biology across a group comprising more than 15% of domain Bacteria](h
ttp://www.nature.com/nature/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/nature14486.html)

> A prominent feature of the bacterial domain is a radiation of major lineages
that are defined as candidate phyla because they lack isolated
representatives. Bacteria from these phyla occur in diverse environments and
are thought to mediate carbon and hydrogen cycles. Genomic analyses of a few
representatives suggested that metabolic limitations have prevented their
cultivation. Here we reconstructed 8 complete and 789 draft genomes from
bacteria representing >35 phyla and documented features that consistently
distinguish these organisms from other bacteria. We infer that this group,
which may comprise >15% of the bacterial domain, has shared evolutionary
history, and describe it as the candidate phyla radiation (CPR). **All CPR
genomes are small and most lack numerous biosynthetic pathways. Owing to
divergent 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene sequences, 50100% of organisms sampled
from specific phyla would evade detection in typical cultivation-independent
surveys. CPR organisms often have self-splicing introns and proteins encoded
within their rRNA genes, a feature rarely reported in bacteria. Furthermore,
they have unusual ribosome compositions. All are missing a ribosomal protein
often absent in symbionts, and specific lineages are missing ribosomal
proteins and biogenesis factors considered universal in bacteria. This implies
different ribosome structures and biogenesis mechanisms, and underlines
unusual biology across a large part of the bacterial domain.**

