---
title: Researchers Dig into US Mortality Data, Discover Disturbing Trends
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
A few months back, we exposed the lie promoted by Francis Collins -
"Scientific and technological breakthroughs that have arisen from NIH-
supported research account for many of the gains that the United States has
seen in health and longevity" in two blog posts.
<!--more-->

[Francis Collins Admits NIH Under Him Has Been
Failing](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/01/22/francis-collins-admits-
nih-under-him-has-been-failing/)

[How Much Will the Americans Suffer, If NIH Shuts
Down?](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/04/07/how-much-will-the-
americans-suffer-if-nih-shuts-down/)

The charts presented in the above articles showed that US life expectancy had
been falling behind not only so called 'developed' countries, but also
supposedly poor countries like Lebanon. Even Gaza strip is on its way to catch
up.

A [new paper published in
PNAS](http://www.pnas.org/content/early/2015/10/29/1518393112.full.pdf) looked
into US mortality statistics, and compared various categories with other other
European countries. What they found is very disturbing (but not at all
unexpected). Poor middle-aged white males in USA are dying at a very high
rate, and the trend stands apart compared to all European countries. The
authors wrote (h/t: ken weiss) - "the declining health and fortunes of poorly
educated American whites. In middle age, they are dying at such a high rate
that they are increasing the death rate for the entire group of middle-aged
white Americas, [authors] Dr. Deaton and Dr. Case found.....The mortality rate
for whites 45-54 years old with no more than a high school education increased
by 135 deaths per 100,000 people from 1999 to 2014."

![Screen Shot 2015-11-03 at 9.11.01 AM](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/11/Screen-Shot-2015-11-03-at-9.11.01-AM-239x300.png)

![Screen Shot 2015-11-03 at 9.10.52 AM](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/11/Screen-Shot-2015-11-03-at-9.10.52-AM-267x300.png)

Three blogs - [Mish](http://globaleconomicanalysis.blogspot.com/2015/11/us-
middle-aged-whites-with-no-college.html), [Ken
Weiss](http://ecodevoevo.blogspot.com/2015/11/unsuspected-death-rates-and-
miners.html) and [Nakedcapitalism](http://www.nakedcapitalism.com/2015/11
/stunning-rise-in-death-rate-pain-levels-for-white-middle-aged-less-educated-
whites.html) discussed the same results. The comment section in
Nakedcapitalism blog is also worth taking a look.

The results are being sold as 'surprising' or 'unexpected' by the academic
class, which essentially shows how out of touch this group has become with
reality. However, there is a cure coming, according to latest comment in
twitter from Francis Collins -

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/Capture-
300x58.jpg)

\---------------------------------

Also check -

[America's Endangered Species: Uneducated, Middle-Aged,
White](http://www.zerohedge.com/news/2015-11-03/americas-endangered-species-
uneducated-middle-aged-white)

> An article published in the latest issue of the Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences (PNAS), documents that, ever since 1998 in the U.S, Whites
who are of non-Hispanic origin have been dying younger and younger, and that
this is especially true for those Whites who are low-educated (non-BAed) and
middle-aged (45- to 54-year-old). But its true also for the other age-
tags: []
categories of non-Hispanic Whites.

This study, by Anne Case and Angus Deaton, Rising morbidity and mortality in
midlife among white non-Hispanic Americans in the 21st century, published now
in PNAS, finds that, for the low-educated, group, "The change in all-cause
mortality for white non-Hispanics 4554 is largely accounted for by an
increasing death rate from external causes, mostly increases in drug and
alcohol poisonings and in suicide. It "was driven primarily by increasing
death rates for those with a high school degree or less. Those with college
education less than a BA saw little change in all-cause mortality over this
period; those with a BA or more education saw death rates fall.

[Stunning Rise in Death Rate, Pain Levels for Middle-Aged, Less Educated
Whites](http://www.nakedcapitalism.com/2015/11/stunning-rise-in-death-rate-
pain-levels-for-white-middle-aged-less-educated-whites.html)

[US Middle-Aged Whites With No College Education Dying at Shocking
Rate](http://globaleconomicanalysis.blogspot.com/2015/11/us-middle-aged-
whites-with-no-college.html)

[Unsuspected death rates and miners'
canaries](http://ecodevoevo.blogspot.com/2015/11/unsuspected-death-rates-and-
miners.html)

