---
title: 'Origins and evolution of viruses of eukaryotes: The ultimate modularity'
categories:
- ncRNA
---
[Link](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0042682215000859)
<!--more-->

> Viruses and other selfish genetic elements are dominant entities in the
biosphere, with respect to both physical abundance and genetic diversity.
Various selfish elements parasitize on all cellular life forms. The relative
abundances of different classes of viruses are dramatically different between
prokaryotes and eukaryotes. In prokaryotes, the great majority of viruses
possess double-stranded (ds) DNA genomes, with a substantial minority of
single-stranded (ss) DNA viruses and only limited presence of RNA viruses. In
contrast, in eukaryotes, RNA viruses account for the majority of the virome
diversity although ssDNA and dsDNA viruses are common as well. Phylogenomic
analysis yields tangible clues for the origins of major classes of eukaryotic
viruses and in particular their likely roots in prokaryotes. Specifically, the
ancestral genome of positive-strand RNA viruses of eukaryotes might have been
assembled de novo from genes derived from prokaryotic retroelements and
bacteria although a primordial origin of this class of viruses cannot be ruled
out. Different groups of double-stranded RNA viruses derive either from dsRNA
bacteriophages or from positive-strand RNA viruses. The eukaryotic ssDNA
viruses apparently evolved via a fusion of genes from prokaryotic rolling
circle-replicating plasmids and positive-strand RNA viruses. Different
families of eukaryotic dsDNA viruses appear to have originated from specific
groups of bacteriophages on at least two independent occasions. Polintons, the
largest known eukaryotic transposons, predicted to also form virus particles,
most likely, were the evolutionary intermediates between bacterial
tectiviruses and several groups of eukaryotic dsDNA viruses including the
proposed order "Megavirales" that unites diverse families of large and giant
viruses. Strikingly, evolution of all classes of eukaryotic viruses appears to
have involved fusion between structural and replicative gene modules derived
from different sources along with additional acquisitions of diverse genes.

Also,

[Evolution of double-stranded DNA viruses of eukaryotes: from bacteriophages
to transposons to giant viruses.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25727355)

> Diverse eukaryotes including animals and protists are hosts to a broad
variety of viruses with double-stranded (ds) DNA genomes, from the largest
known viruses, such as pandoraviruses and mimiviruses, to tiny polyomaviruses.
Recent comparative genomic analyses have revealed many evolutionary
connections between dsDNA viruses of eukaryotes, bacteriophages, transposable
elements, and linear DNA plasmids. These findings provide an evolutionary
scenario that derives several major groups of eukaryotic dsDNA viruses,
including the proposed order "Megavirales," adenoviruses, and virophages from
a group of large virus-like transposons known as Polintons (Mavericks). The
Polintons have been recently shown to encode two capsid proteins, suggesting
that these elements lead a dual lifestyle with both a transposon and a viral
phase and should perhaps more appropriately be named polintoviruses. Here, we
describe the recently identified evolutionary relationships between
bacteriophages of the family Tectiviridae, polintoviruses, adenoviruses,
virophages, large and giant DNA viruses of eukaryotes of the proposed order
"Megavirales," and linear mitochondrial and cytoplasmic plasmids. We outline
an evolutionary scenario under which the polintoviruses were the first group
of eukaryotic dsDNA viruses that evolved from bacteriophages and became the
ancestors of most large DNA viruses of eukaryotes and a variety of other
selfish elements. Distinct lines of origin are detectable only for
herpesviruses (from a different bacteriophage root) and
polyoma/papillomaviruses (from single-stranded DNA viruses and ultimately from
plasmids). Phylogenomic analysis of giant viruses provides compelling evidence
of their independent origins from smaller members of the putative order
"Megavirales," refuting the speculations on the evolution of these viruses
from an extinct fourth domain of cellular life.

