---
title: 'Experimental phage therapy of burn wound infection: difficult first steps'
categories:
- chem
---
[2014 paper in Int J Burns
Trauma](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4212884/)
<!--more-->

> Antibiotic resistance has become a major public health problem and the
antibiotics pipeline is running dry. Bacteriophages (phages) may offer an
innovative means of infection treatment, which can be combined or alternated
with antibiotic therapy and may enhance our abilities to treat bacterial
infections successfully. Today, in the Queen Astrid Military Hospital, phage
therapy is increasingly considered as part of a salvage therapy for patients
in therapeutic dead end, particularly those with multidrug resistant
infections. We describe the application of a well-defined and quality
controlled phage cocktail, active against Pseudomonas aeruginosa and
Staphylococcus aureus, on colonized burn wounds within a modest clinical trial
(nine patients, 10 applications), which was approved by a leading Belgian
Medical Ethical Committee. No adverse events, clinical abnormalities or
changes in laboratory test results that could be related to the application of
phages were observed. Unfortunately, this very prudent clinical trial did not
allow for an adequate evaluation of the efficacy of the phage cocktail.
Nevertheless, this first baby step revealed several pitfalls and lessons for
future experimental phage therapy and helped overcome the psychological
hurdles that existed to the use of viruses in the treatment of patients in our
burn unit.

