---
title: Lior Pachter Snubbed for Asking Relevant Questions on a Paper
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
A rather bizarre bioinformatics paper [showed up in
F1000](http://f1000research.com/articles/4-900/v1). It made complete mockery
of [scientific publication
standards](http://www.icmje.org/recommendations/browse/roles-and-
responsibilities/defining-the-role-of-authors-and-contributors.html) with the
excuse of 'doing something new'. The paper has over 50 authors, and some are
included for doing less than minor tasks. For example, one author only added
two slashes to turn 'http:contributor-covenant.org' into 'http://contributor-
covenant.org'. That surely appears like a major contribution. Another author
corrected only a typo in the code (changed 'activae' to 'activate').
<!--more-->

It is also not clear, whether authors are listed twice or more in the authors'
list, because some names are included as pseudonyms (e.g. 'en zyme').
Apparently the senior author gave more importance to github ID than real name.
Berkeley Professor Lior Pachter's attempt to sort that out had been met with
very rude protest from the senior author of the F1000 paper. Pachter wrote in
the comment section -

![Lior_Pachter_photo_2015](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/10/Lior_Pachter_photo_2015-256x300.jpg)

> I noticed that "en zyme" is listed as an author with the affiliation of
"independent Researcher in Boston, MA". This individual appears to be Nathan
Kohn, a part time lecturer at Boston University Metropolitan College and
should be listed as such (assuming his contribution merits authorship).

The senior author of the paper replied in his blog -

> Please note that there is a special place in hell reserved for people who
attempt to deanonymize someone's pseudonym on a whim; this is both
unprofessional and potentially harmful to the individual in question. Yes, I'm
talking to you, Lior.

That kind of rude response was definitely uncalled for, given that Pachter was
making a very valid point (in fact two, because he also pointed out negligible
contributions of authors).

When it comes to using pseudonyms for publishing paper, people often mention
Gosset's taking the name 'Student' to publish his famous paper on t-test. Wiki
says -

> The Student's t-test work was submitted to and accepted in the journal
Biometrika and published in 1908. Company policy at Guinness forbade its
chemists from publishing their findings, so Gosset published his statistical
work under the pseudonym "Student".

What that example proves in the current context is anyone's guess. If one
looks into history, one can definitely find exceptions of all kinds - famous
professor not giving credit to student, student stealing research results from
professor and later becoming famous, people publishing research results based
on what they overheard from others in conferences, and so on. Does that mean
all those actions are justified, because someone well-known did before? Looks
like even the author(s) of the wiki page is apologetic about Gosset's
apparently harmless deed and added a poor 'mea culpa' to explain that Gosset
was not cheating his company -

> Guinness had a policy of allowing technical staff leave for study (so-called
"study leave"), which Gosset used during the first two terms of the 19061907
academic year in Professor Karl Pearsons Biometric Laboratory at University
College London. Gosset's identity was then known to fellow statisticians and
to editor-in-chief Karl Pearson.[citation needed] It is not clear how much of
the work Gosset performed while he was at Guinness and how much was done when
he was on study leave at University College London.

A better argument would be discussing the merits and demerits of using
pseudonyms for scientific papers, and as demerits, we can see many. Someone
can cheat his university or company out of legitimate intellectual property
rights. Someone can take two pseudonyms to argue in favor of or against a
controversial scientific argument, and appear victorious no matter which side
wins. Imagine Dr. Jekyll supporting Darwin's theory of evolution in late 19th
century and Mr. Hyde writing papers it. However, having that kind of
intelligent discussion does not seem appropriate for the F1000 paper, given
that anyone who can fog a mirror has been made an author.

The senior author thinks his case is unusual, because he is publishing a paper
on a software. A software is already a copyrighted publication by itself, and
the only reasons another paper needs to announce its arrival are (a) present
unique algorithmic contribution, (b) make grant Gods, who give more importance
to papers than computer programs, happy. In the first case, 50 people rarely
create an algorithm and I doubt that is the case here. Speaking of the second
case, this mockery of science has been funded by NHGRI, [which is a mockery of
science by itself](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/01/09/lets-discuss-
is-it-time-to-shut-down-nhgri/).

Pachter has taken a courageous stand given the risk of pointing out
discrepancies in a paper with 50 authors and annoying many of them. I am
puzzled the other authors allowed this nonsense to take place in their name.

