---
title: Eric H. Davidson (1937 - 2015)
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
I am incredibly sad to learn that Caltech professor and renowned developmental
biologist Eric Davidson passed away last week. A few years back, he jokingly
said to me at a sea urchin conference - "I am going to keep working till I
pop." He indeed did so, as Bill Longabaugh wrote in a comment
[here](http://ivory.idyll.org/blog/2015-eric-davidson-passes-
away.html#comment-2232204859) \-
<!--more-->

> I got an email from Eric on Saturday night with a request to add new links
to the endomesoderm network in time for the sea urchin conference next month;
he was doing science right up to the end. Last night I raised a glass of Knob
Creek in his memory. RIP Eric.

Eric's inexhaustible energy came from realizing that modern technology could
answer questions about evolution that biologists pondered for generations but
had no means to address, and he came up with a framework to systematically
address those questions. You can explore the gene regulatory network for early
evolution of sea urchin embryo [here](http://grns.biotapestry.org/SpEndomes/)
\-

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/09/Capture1-300x186.png)

Eventually scientists will build similar networks for other organisms, and
only then it will be possible to ask questions about which parts of the
network are conserved over time and why. An early indication of such work came
in his paper with [Veronica
Hinman](http://www.cmu.edu/bio/faculty/primary/hinman.html), and many
additional examples were given in his latest book with Dr. Isabelle Peter
(check "[A Must Read Book, If You Like to Understand
Genomes](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/05/01/a-must-read-book-if-you-
like-to-understand-genomes/)" and "[An Email Interview with Evolutionary
Developmental Biologists Isabelle Peter and Eric
Davidson](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/07/13/an-email-interview-with-
evolutionary-developmental-biologists-isabelle-peter-and-eric-davidson/)").
Still, Eric realized more than anyone else that the entire field is in its
infancy and with enormous potential.

I wrote about his research in a number of earlier blog posts, but here I like
to say a few things about his human side.

\-----------------------------------------------------

**His father - the past**

When my dad passed away seven years back, Eric sent me a kind message
mentioning how he still missed his father. He preserved his memory about
[Morris Davidson, who was a well-known American
artist](http://www.provincetownartistregistry.com/D/davidson_morris.html), by
using one of his paintings as the cover of the last book.

> On our cover, we have reproduced a painting made about a half century ago by
Morris Davidson (Eric Davidson's father, 1898-1979), who was a well-known
American artist. In the abstract relations of its patterns, this painting for
us evokes the beautiful organization of the natural world.

![51yE5HjY9pL._SX382_BO1,204,203,200_](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/09/51yE5HjY9pL._SX382_BO1204203200_-231x300.jpg)

\-----------------------------------------------------

**Wikipedia - the 'future'**

Eric was keenly observant about technology and understood both the positives
and negatives. About nine years back, I exchanged several emails with him
extolling the virtues of wikipedia, and telling him how those modern social
software would preserve human knowledge and wisdom through collective efforts
of the society. At that time, wikipedia did not have much to show on the
topics related to science or scientists.

Eric did not seem enamored about this 'social' technology and explained that
high-quality documents on scientific topics could not come from random efforts
of thousands of people. Being frustrated about his inability to appreciate
hipster technology of the future, I decided to create [his wiki
page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eric_H._Davidson) and watch its evolution.
My observation of progression of his wiki page and several other collective
projects (unrelated) make me believe that he won the argument.

