---
title: Thymic Involution - an Evolutionary Mystery
categories:
- ncRNA
---
**Review paper**
<!--more-->

[An evolutionary perspective on the mechanisms of immunosenescence](http://www
.cell.com/trends/immunology/abstract/S1471-4906\(09\)00105-7)

> There is an accumulating body of evidence that a decline in immune function
with age is common to most if not all vertebrates. For instance, age-
associated thymic involution seems to occur in all species that possess a
thymus, indicating that this process is evolutionary ancient and conserved.
The precise mechanisms regulating immunosenescence remain to be resolved, but
much of what we do know is consistent with modern evolutionary theory. In this
review, we assess our current knowledge from an evolutionary perspective on
the occurrence of immunosenescence, we show that life history trade-offs play
a key role and we highlight the possible advantages of the age-related decline
in thymic function.

\------------------------------------

[wiki](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thymic_involution#Evolutionary_Mystery)

> Thymic involution remains an evolutionary mystery since it occurs in most
vertebrates despite its negative effects. Since it is not induced by
senescence, many scientists have hypothesized that there may have been
evolutionary pressures for the organ to involute. A few hypotheses are as
follows: Developing T cells that interact strongly with antigen being
presented within the thymus are induced to undergo programmed cell death. The
intended effect is deletion of self-reactive T cells. This works well when the
antigen being presented within the thymus is truly of self origin, but antigen
from pathogenic microbes that happens to infiltrate the thymus has the
potential to subvert the entire process. Rather than deleting T cells that
would cause autoimmunity, T cells capable of eliminating the infiltrating
pathogen are deleted instead. It has been proposed that one way to minimize
this problem is to produce as many long-lived T cells as possible during the
time of life when the thymus is most likely to be pristine, which generally
would be when organisms are very young and under the protection of a
functional maternal immune system.[20] Thus, in mice and humans, for example,
the best time to have a prodigiously functional thymus is prior to birth. In
turn, it is well known from Williams'[21] theory of the evolution of
senescence that strong selection for enhanced early function readily
accommodates, through antagonistic pleiotropy, deleterious later occurring
effects, thus potentially accounting for the especially early demise of the
thymus. The disposable soma hypothesis and life history hypothesis say
similarly that tradeoffs are involved in thymic involution. Since the immune
system must compete with other bodily systems, notably reproduction, for
limited physiological resources, the body must invest in the immune system
differentially at different stages of life. There is high immunological
investment in youth since immunological memory is low.[1] There are also
hypotheses that suggest that thymic involution is directly adaptive. For
example, some hypotheses have proposed that thymic involution may help in
avoidance of autoimmunity or other dangers,[22] prevention of infection,[9]
and production of an optimal repertoire of T-cells.[23] Zinc deficiency may
also play a role[24].

\------------------------------------

[A thymus candidate in lampreys](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21293377)

> Immunologists and evolutionary biologists have been debating the nature of
the immune system of jawless vertebrates--lampreys and hagfish--since the
nineteenth century. In the past 50 years, these fish were shown to have
antibody-like responses and the capacity to reject allografts but were found
to lack the immunoglobulin-based adaptive immune system of jawed vertebrates.
Recent work has shown that lampreys have lymphocytes that instead express
somatically diversified antigen receptors that contain leucine-rich-repeats,
termed variable lymphocyte receptors (VLRs), and that the type of VLR
expressed is specific to the lymphocyte lineage: T-like lymphocytes express
type A VLR (VLRA) genes, and B-like lymphocytes express VLRB genes. These
clonally diverse anticipatory antigen receptors are assembled from incomplete
genomic fragments by gene conversion, which is thought to be initiated by
either of two genes encoding cytosine deaminase, cytosine deaminase 1 (CDA1)
in T-like cells and CDA2 in B-like cells. It is unknown whether jawless fish,
like jawed vertebrates, have dedicated primary lymphoid organs, such as the
thymus, where the development and selection of lymphocytes takes place. Here
we identify discrete thymus-like lympho-epithelial structures, termed
thymoids, in the tips of the gill filaments and the neighbouring secondary
lamellae (both within the gill basket) of lamprey larvae. Only in the thymoids
was expression of the orthologue of the gene encoding forkhead box N1 (FOXN1),
a marker of the thymopoietic microenvironment in jawed vertebrates,
accompanied by expression of CDA1 and VLRA. This expression pattern was
unaffected by immunization of lampreys or by stimulation with a T-cell
mitogen. Non-functional VLRA gene assemblies were found frequently in the
thymoids but not elsewhere, further implicating the thymoid as the site of
development of T-like cells in lampreys. These findings suggest that the
similarities underlying the dual nature of the adaptive immune systems in the
two sister groups of vertebrates extend to primary lymphoid organs.

\------------------------------------------

[Thymus involution and regeneration: two sides of the same
coin?](http://www.nature.com/nri/journal/v13/n11/abs/nri3534.html)

> In vertebrates, the thymus is the main site of T cell development. The
thymus reaches its maximum output during adolescence, after which it shrinks
and generates fewer and fewer T cells. Physiological age-related involution of
the thymus and failure to recover after injury are associated with impaired
cellular immunity; hence, there is considerable interest in developing
strategies to combat these deficiencies. In this Opinion article, we briefly
review the phylogenetic and ontogenetic hallmarks of thymus development and
function, and we discuss experimental models of impaired thymopoiesis and the
molecular mechanisms of thymopoietic recovery. At each stage of the discussion
we highlight the major gaps in our current knowledge.

