---
title: Peak Sequencing? BGI Unveils 'Nation-scale' Sequencer
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
BGI has been developing/co-developing a number of technologies to compete
head-to-head with Illumina. One of those is the bioinformatics company [L3
Bioinformatics](http://l3-bioinfo.com/) started by Ruibang Luo and Professor
Tak-wah Lam of Hong Kong university. They [made their public
announcement](http://l3-bioinfo.com/products/Helicube/index.html) about BGI
cloud in April 2015.
<!--more-->

On the sequencing side, BGI's Complete Genomics unit just announced an
['industrial scale' sequencer](http://www.completegenomics.com/news-events
/press-releases/complete-genomics-previews-revolocity-sequencing-system-at-
european-human-genetics-conference-2015/), or what the [Omics! Omics! blog
describes as 'nation-scale' sequencer](http://omicsomics.blogspot.com/2015/06
/bgi-unveils-sequencing-factory-to-go.html).

> In recent years, DNA sequencing and computational technologies have advanced
rapidly, throughput has skyrocketed, and the cost of genome sequencing has
plummeted. Complete Genomics has been at the forefront of these advances,
sequencing more than 20,000 whole human genomes and driving the adoption of
next-generation sequencing (NGS) in clinical research. Now Complete Genomics
has incorporated its NGS technology and operational knowledge into the
Revolocity system the first truly integrated high-capacity sequencing system
for laboratories that demand a cutting-edge genomic facility.

The Revolocity sequencing system is designed to deliver 10,000 whole genome
sequences (WGS) a year, and expand to 30,000 WGS per yearsurpassing the
scalability of any other sequencing solution available today. The Revolocity
system also supports whole exome sequencing (WES). It automates DNA
purification from a variety of starting materials, including whole human blood
and saliva, and then processes samples seamlessly through the library
preparation, sequencing, and data analysis phases. The Revolocity system
provides high-confidence data on small variants, including SNPs, insertions,
deletions, block substitutions as well as CNVs and structural variants.

Omics!Omics! blog writes -

> Which vision of population-scale genomics will dominate the next few years?
An integrated factory of uber-short read sequencers? A factory of somewhat
longer (but still short) read sequencers with user-defined sample and library
prep? Or long, noisy reads run on something that will fit in an overhead bin
-- but not available (if at all) for many months? In the span of two decades
we've come a long way from dreaming of a 1Mb/day factory -- but do we still
need a factory?

We have no idea, but it clearly looks like the society is reaching 'peak
sequencing' and should invest in other components of medical science.

