---
title: Quality-Controlled Small-Scale Production of a Well- Defined Bacteriophage
  Cocktail for Use in Human Clinical Trials
categories:
- chem
---
[PLOS One paper on producing phage](http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?i
d=10.1371/journal.pone.0004944) \-
<!--more-->

> We describe the small-scale, laboratory-based, production and quality
control of a cocktail, consisting of exclusively lytic bacteriophages,
designed for the treatment of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus
infections in burn wound patients. Based on succesive selection rounds three
bacteriophages were retained from an initial pool of 82 P. aeruginosa and 8 S.
aureus bacteriophages, specific for prevalent P. aeruginosa and S. aureus
strains in the Burn Centre of the Queen Astrid Military Hospital in Brussels,
Belgium. This cocktail, consisting of P. aeruginosa phages 14/1 (Myoviridae)
and PNM (Podoviridae) and S. aureus phage ISP (Myoviridae) was produced and
purified of endotoxin. Quality control included Stability (shelf life),
determination of pyrogenicity, sterility and cytotoxicity, confirmation of the
absence of temperate bacteriophages and transmission electron microscopy-based
confirmation of the presence of the expected virion morphologic particles as
well as of their specific interaction with the target bacteria. Bacteriophage
genome and proteome analysis confirmed the lytic nature of the bacteriophages,
the absence of toxin-coding genes and showed that the selected phages 14/1,
PNM and ISP are close relatives of respectively F8, wKMV and phage G1. The
bacteriophage cocktail is currently being evaluated in a pilot clinical study
cleared by a leading Medical Ethical Committee.

