---
title: "&ldquo;Into the Sciences&rdquo; &ndash; Frederick J. Ross"
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Our readers, and especially those involved in interdisciplinary research, will
enjoy the new book [Into the
Sciences](http://madhadron.com/posts/2015-10-14-book_released.html) by
Frederick J. Ross. In it, Fred distills the essence of science and scientific
practices using numerous examples from math, physics, biology, medicine and
musicology. Here is Fred's summary of the book -
<!--more-->

> To laymen 'science' and 'research' seem amorphous things, mysterious work
performed by lab-coated acolytes that somehow yields knowledge of our world.
This book breaks them down into a clear model of the activities involved, then
uses that model to explain why science is separated into disciplines, how
those disciplines are shaped by their diffferent subject matter, and finally
how researchers choose what they do.

![into_the_sciences-cover](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/11/into_the_sciences-cover-200x300.jpg)

Bioinformaticians may remember Fred from [his parting message to the
community](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/01/27/a-farewell-to-
bioinformatics/) that went viral two years back. We visited [his
blog](http://madhadron.com/) after reading the post at reddit and found it to
be full of intelligent and thought-provoking articles on math, physics,
systems biology and computing (see links
[here](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/01/28/index-to-entire-set-of-
freds-rants/)). The author appeared to have deep understanding of several
scientific areas.

In his book, Fred uses that multidisciplinary expertise to write about the
common theme among scientific practices in diverse fields. He explains how
scientists ('practitioners') from all disciplines attempt to solve messy real
life problems by converting them into 'reasonable approximations' of
'idealized trials'. Also, each scientific field has a set of 'primitive
notions' and existing theories, which get updated through repeated cycle of
new observations and attempts to explain those observations based on prior
understanding.

Outsiders may perceive science to be all mechanical, but, in reality, the
sense of beauty plays a big role there. Elegant theories, such as Abel's group
theory, Dirac's quantum mechanics or Feynman graph, not only solved the
problems at hand, but also opened doors for attacking many other difficult
problems. Fred devotes a large section on aesthetics of science and explains
how dedicated practitioners learn to appreciate the beauty over the years.

The last chapter is on interdisciplinary research, which, these days, often
turn out to be placing experts from different areas in a room (or the same
project) and expecting magic to happen. Fred explains why that magic turns out
to be elusive. Experts in one field are usually novices in another, and it is
often difficult for them to leave their own comfort zones to walk the full
journey from novice to practitioner in other interdisciplinary areas.

"**Into the Sciences**" can be the perfect Christmas gift for someone starting
graduate school or someone interested in leaving the comfort of one field to
explore another one. All ninety pages of the book contain wise observations
through numerous examples from different branches of science. You can buy it
[either from his
website](http://madhadron.com/posts/2015-10-14-book_released.html), or [at
Amazon](http://www.amazon.com/Into-Sciences-Frederick-Ross-
ebook/dp/B016296DPI/ref). You can check out the first couple of chapters [at
this link](http://madhadron.com/into_the_sciences-sample.html). We plan to
publish an interview with the author in a few days.

