---
title: 'Sequenceserver: a modern graphical user interface for custom BLAST databases'
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
We use this program a lot and are happy to see the paper out. Installation is
fairly straightforward, if you have Ruby on Rails working.
<!--more-->

[Link](http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2015/11/27/033142)

> The dramatic drop in DNA sequencing costs has created many opportunities for
novel biological research. These opportunities largely rest upon the ability
to effectively compare newly obtained and previously known sequences. This is
commonly done with BLAST, yet using BLAST directly on new datasets requires
substantial technical skills or helpful colleagues. Furthermore, graphical
interfaces for BLAST are challenging to install and largely mimic underlying
computational processes rather than work patterns of researchers. We combined
a user-centric design philosophy with sustainable software development
approaches to create Sequenceserver (http://sequenceserver.com), a modern
graphical user interface for BLAST. Sequenceserver substantially increases the
efficiency of researchers working with sequence data. This is due first to
innovations at three levels. First, our software can be installed and used on
custom datasets extremely rapidly for personal and shared applications.
Second, based on analysis of user input and simple algorithms, Sequenceserver
reduces the amount of decisions the user must make, provides interactive
visual feedback, and prevents common potential errors that would otherwise
cause erroneous results. Finally, Sequenceserver provides multiple highly
visual and text-based output options that mirror the requirements and work
patterns of researchers. Together, these features greatly facilitate BLAST
analysis and interpretation and thus substantially enhance researcher
productivity.

