---
title: After SPAdes and Rosalind, Russians Fail Again
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
According to US media, Russians have not succeeded in doing anything right
since the Sputnik and Gagarin days, and whatever small contributions they made
went out of favor after the latest sanctions. [USA's most
trusted](http://www.politico.com/story/2015/03/fox-news-trusted-network-
poll-115887.html) Fox News asks Americans to [start killing
Russians](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/03/17/outrageous-
prediction-2015-usa-will-start-to-see-exodus-of-russian-scientists/), whereas
Saturday Night Live mocks Russians by equating them with graves and
cemeteries.
<!--more-->

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/9MtROAz27o0" frameborder="0"> </iframe>

Therefore, it is no surprise that nobody uses Rosalind and SPAdes since
Obama's sanctions. Here is another Russian program that lost its market share.

[Kaspersky Lab becomes the leader in anti-virus sales in
Europe](http://fortruss.blogspot.com/2015/03/normal-0-false-false-false-en-
us-x-none_30.html)

> The Kaspersky Lab (KL) became the leader in sales of information security
software in Europe, having overtaken the previous leader Symantec. This was
announced by the analytical firm GfK in its report. Kaspersky software
especially popular in Germany, although in general protection software does
not sell as well as before.

In January 2015, Europeans spent 25.2 million Euro on antivirus and other
security software, or 10% less than in January 2014. KL took first place, with
34% of all sales. The second place took McAfee with 27% and Symantec with 25%.
A year ago the situation was different: Symantec had 35% of the market, KL
30%, and McAfee 24%.

GfK studies retail sales and does not provide statistics on internet sales. KL
has especially strong presence in Germany: in the space of one year the
company increased its market share from 53% to 60%.

Please note that the internet is the primary mode of sales of Kaspersky Lab
software, because most mainstream outlets in UK 'sanctions' it.

[About Kaspersky](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eugene_Kaspersky) \-

> Kaspersky developed an interest in mathematics during his early teens.[3]
While still at school, he attended extracurricular classes in advanced
mathematics and physics on a special course organized by the Moscow Institute
of Physics and Technology.[3] Later, after winning a math competition, he was
selected for enrollment at an advanced technical school, the Kolmogorov
Advanced Educational Scientific Center of Moscow State University, where he
furthered his studies in physics and advanced mathematics.[3]

