---
title: Top Ten Genomes - (vii) Bladderwort
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
'Biology of Genomes' conference is taking place this week, and we are covering
unusual genomes published over the last decade.
<!--more-->

[Top Ten Genomes (i) Lamprey](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/05/04/top-
ten-genomes-i-lamprey/)

[Top Ten Genomes (ii) Dynamically Changing
Genomes](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/05/05/top-ten-genomes-ii-
dynamically-changing-genomes/)

[Top Ten Genomes (iii) Paris
japonica](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/05/05/top-ten-genomes-iii-
paris-japonica/)

[Top Ten Genomes - (iv) Methanococcus
jannaschii](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/05/06/top-ten-genomes-iv-
methanococcus-jannaschii/)

[Top Ten Genomes (v) Ich](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/05/07/top-ten-
genomes-v-ich/)

[Top Ten Genomes (vi) Oxytricha trifallax for MIC and MAC in
Ciliates](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/05/07/top-ten-genomes-vi-mic-
and-mac-in-ciliates/)

Our today's nomination goes to bladderwort. When this genome got published two
years back, it ended all debates about functionality of junk DNA. Therefore,
it definitely deserves a place among top ten unusual genomes.

[Carnivorous Bladderwort Plant Genome Shows Some Designers are More
Intelligent than Others](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/05/12
/carnivorous-bladderwort-plant-genome-shows-some-designers-are-more-
intelligent-than-others/)

> When we argue against functionality of junk DNA, many others say that it is
impossible to say so until someone deletes all junk DNA in a small baby and
shows that he lives till old age. Nature (not the journal) may have done such
an experiment in a different organism and Nature journal published the report
despite telling us two weeks back that junk DNA was not understood. We wish
other pressing problems of the world get solved so quickly.

The bladderwort genome is amazing in many respects. 82 Mb is rather tiny
compared to 22 Gb conifer genome and even larger lily genome. Quite
surprisingly, the genome went through three rounds of whole genome duplication
since diverging from common ancestry with tomato and grape. Still it has only
2% of junk dna, or essentially every piece of DNA that could be removed was
removed.

The original paper -

[Architecture and evolution of a minute plant genome ](http://www.nature.com/n
ature/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/nature12132.html)h/t: angry ?@DanGraur

> It has been argued that the evolution of plant genome size is principally
unidirectional and increasing owing to the varied action of whole-genome
duplications (WGDs) and mobile element proliferation1. However, extreme genome
size reductions have been reported in the angiosperm family tree. Here we
report the sequence of the 82-megabase genome of the carnivorous bladderwort
plant Utricularia gibba. Despite its tiny size, the U. gibba genome
accommodates a typical number of genes for a plant, with the main difference
from other plant genomes arising from a drastic reduction in non-genic DNA.
Unexpectedly, we identified at least three rounds of WGD in U. gibba since
common ancestry with tomato (Solanum) and grape (Vitis). The compressed
architecture of the U. gibba genome indicates that a small fraction of
intergenic DNA, with few or no active retrotransposons, is sufficient to
regulate and integrate all the processes required for the development and
reproduction of a complex organism.

