---
title: '"If You Learn from MOOC, You Are an Evil Person" - Science'
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
After championing the march of technology for decades, university professors
are finding out that they are the target of the next round of 'creative
destruction', and they do not like the message at all. Two professors from
Harvard published an analysis in Science magazine to show that those learning
from MOOCs are likely to be from 'evil one-percenters'. Next thing we know is
that these Harvard professors will write grants to solve this new 'digital
divide' problem they identified.
<!--more-->

[Democratizing education? Examining access and usage patterns in massive open
online courses](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/350/6265/1245.full)

> Massive open online courses (MOOCs) are often characterized as remedies to
educational disparities related to social class. Using data from 68 MOOCs
offered by Harvard and MIT between 2012 and 2014, we found that course
participants from the United States tended to live in more-affluent and
better-educated neighborhoods than the average U.S. resident. Among those who
did register for courses, students with greater socioeconomic resources were
more likely to earn a certificate. Furthermore, these differences in MOOC
access and completion were larger for adolescents and young adults, the
traditional ages where people find on-ramps into science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) coursework and careers. Our findings raise
concerns that MOOCs and similar approaches to online learning can exacerbate
rather than reduce disparities in educational outcomes related to
socioeconomic status.

Here is the problems with above kinds of analysis. If the Harvard group
decided to do a similar analysis for sequencing instruments, when Illumina
first came out with their machines, or computers, when using PCs in classroom
was starting to get popular, they would have come to very similar conclusion.
Universities like Harvard had big advantage over colleges in poor areas in
getting access to the first computers or first large sequencing instrument.
Such articles did not gain popularity among academics, because their jobs were
not threatened.

Sure, there was some hue and cry in those years about 'digital divide', and
some people in MIT and Stanford got grants to 'bring down the cost of PC to
$100'. We know how [that academic nonsense
ended](http://www.technologyreview.com/news/414102/100-laptop-
becomes-a-5-pc/).

> Benders departure from OLPC came after a disagreement over the organizations
plans to break away from a pure open-source approach and offer a dual-boot
version of its laptop that could also run a stripped-down version of
Microsofts Windows operating system, something Bender said he feared would
make OLPC just another laptop company. But Nicholas Negroponte, founder of
OLPC and, previously, cofounder of MITs Media Lab, said that the move was
necessary to boost sales and, consequently, expand the availability of the
machines to children.

Getting back to MOOC, Compeau and Pevzner have more realistic view of what is
inevitable (see ["MOOCs Are Actually
Books"](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/10/01/moocs-are-actually-
books/)).

> Was the printing press a worthwhile invention? This may seem like a silly
question, but some of the backlash against early MOOCs reminds us of a
criticism of the printing press made by the prominent 15th-century polymath
Johannes Trithemius. Believing printed books were inferior to hand-copied
manuscripts, Trithemius wrote, The printed book is made of paper and, like
paper, will quickly disappear.

Anyone who has witnessed the beauty of a Renaissance illuminated manuscript
can sympathize with Trithemius. Likewise, anyone who has attended a lecture
delivered by a brilliant teacher in a small classroom can sympathize with
Vardi. Yet in reality, contemporary higher education often falls short of this
ideal.

