---
title: Scripting for Biology - Online Virtual Classroom-based Module
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Hello all,
<!--more-->

I am building a number of online virtual classroom-based modules for
researchers working on biological data. The description for the first one is
attached below, and I will have a beta test starting Sept 14. Please feel free
to pass to anyone interested. The beta test is free, and all course materials
(including cloud account) will be provided. I currently have only a small
number of spots left for this one. If interested, please email pandora at
homolog.us.

This course will be useful for anyone without knowledge of programming, and
also for those knowing one language (e.g. python) well, who may want to learn
another one (say, golang).

\----------------------------

**Scripting for Biology - 1**

**Time:** Sept 14 - Oct 9 (four weeks) 

The purpose of this four-week module is to help biology researchers learn
scripting languages (python, PERL, GO). You are expected to learn only one
language, not all three.

Whether you never programmed or have some programming experience, this course
will help you greatly improve your skills. Moreover, our examples are chosen
from relevant bioinformatics problems so that you can apply them to understand
recent papers. Some of them will be covered in the second scripting module and
other modules related to RNAseq, assembly, metagenomics, etc.

**How the classes work**

I will first give you short introduction to each topic and then let you start
writing your own codes to solve problems. When you solve one problem, you will
get another more difficult one and so on. If you get stuck at any step, I will
help you overcome the obstacle.

We will keep the class size small (~10) so that I can monitor the work done by
every student. Each student will be solving problem at his own pace without
being impacted by the rest of the class. So, if someone learns fast, he can
finish the modules quickly or go on to solve more difficult problems.

The course is primarily based on chat. We will keep the provision for using
google hangout for video discussions, but I plan to use it sparingly. Also, I
am thinking about preparing some introductory videos, but it also appears that
text-based method of delivering content is more effective than video-based
method.

We will provide cloud account for each student with relevant programs
installed. All other course-related materials will be provided.

**Schedule**

Week 1 - three 75 minute classes.

D1. i) Introduction to computer hardware, operating system and programming.
ii) UNIX practices. iii) Entrance test.

D2. Introduction to python/PERL/GO. ii) Coding practices.

D3. i) Solving the first bioinformatics puzzle. ii) Fun with debugging.

Week 2 - project 1 (k-mer counting).

Week 3 - three 75 minute classes.

D1. i) Strings, ii) Regular expression, iii) Associative arrays.

D2. i) Solving another bioinformatics puzzle.

D3. i) Loops and conditions. ii) Advanced debugging.

Week 4 - project 2 (translation and genetic code) and exit test.

