---
title: Top Ten Genomes - (iii)  Paris japonica
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Does freshwater protist [Polychaos
dubium](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polychaos_dubium) have the largest
genome? At 670 billion nt (200x human genome), it does sound like really
large, but [Casey L. McGrath and Laura Katz
warned](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0169534703003239) \-
"The genome size of _A. dubia_ has yet to be estimated using current molecular
techniques, so this estimate should be viewed with caution."
<!--more-->

Excluding _Polychaos dubium_, the honor for the largest genome goes to [animal
marbled lungfish](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marbled_lungfish) (133 billion
nt) and [plant Paris japonica](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paris_japonica)
(150 billion nt).

![220px-
Paris_japonica_Kinugasasou_in_Hakusan_2003_7_27](http://www.homolog.us/blogs
/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/220px-
Paris_japonica_Kinugasasou_in_Hakusan_2003_7_27.jpg)

\------------------------------------------------------------------------

![download](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/05/download.jpg)

But apart from 'pissing contest' between organisms, what does genome size
really tell us about biology? Very little, as it turns out. [Canadian
evolutionary biologist T. Ryan
Gregory](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/T._Ryan_Gregory), who spent many years
studying the sizes of genomes, wrote a review paper titled ['A guided tour of
large genome size in animals: what we know and where we are
heading'](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/ncrna/2014/12/17/evolution-of-genome-
size-scientific-and-religious-analysis/) with the following highlights -

1\. Based on data collected on ~5000 animal genomes so far, genome sizes were
found to vary 7000-fold. That is an enormous range.

2\. Animals with the largest genomes lungfish (~80-120Gbp), salamanders
(similar order), sharks (~10-20Gbp), grasshoppers, flatworms and crustaceans.

3\. The only phenotypic links with genome size are in larger cell size and
longer time to do cell division for organisms with large genomes.

4\. Ecological correlation An emerging trend from animal (and more
specifically, crustacean) genome size studies is the positive relationship
between genome size and latitude.

5\. Correlation with intron size Intron size and genome size are known to be
positively correlated between species of Drosophila (Moriyama et al. 1998),
within the class of mammals (Ogata et al. 1996), and across eukaryotes in
general (Vinogradov 1999).

**6\. No relationship between genome size and animal complexity has ever been found. Researchers have been looking into this for over four decades.**

The last point is so important that we decided to nominate _Paris japonica_
among the top ten genomes. Ecological correlation is quite fascinating too.
What are the evolutionary implications?

Needless to add that large genomes pose quite a bit of challenge to the
bioinformaticians trying to assemble them. Legendary bioinformatician Eugene
Myers is using Pacbio technology to [solve one such 32 Gbp
puzzle](https://dazzlerblog.wordpress.com/2014/12/07/dazzling-postdoc/).

