---
title: Phage Therapy
categories:
- ncRNA
---
[Link](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phage_therapy)
<!--more-->

> Phage therapy or viral phage therapy is the therapeutic use of
bacteriophages to treat pathogenic bacterial infections.[1] Although
extensively used and developed mainly in former Soviet Union countries circa
1920, the treatment is not approved in countries other than Russia and
Georgia. Phage therapy has many potential applications in human medicine as
well as dentistry, veterinary science, and agriculture.[2] If the target host
of a phage therapy treatment is not an animal the term "biocontrol" (as in
phage-mediated biocontrol of bacteria) is usually employed, rather than "phage
therapy".

Bacteriophages are much more specific than antibiotics, so they can
hypothetically be chosen to be indirectly harmless not only to the host
organism (human, animal, or plant), but also to other beneficial bacteria,
such as gut flora, reducing the chances of opportunistic infections.[3] They
would have a high therapeutic index, that is, phage therapy would be expected
to give rise to few side effects. Because phages replicate in vivo, a smaller
effective dose can be used. On the other hand, this specificity is also a
disadvantage: a phage will only kill a bacterium if it is a match to the
specific strain. Consequently phage mixtures are often applied to improve the
chances of success, or samples can be taken and an appropriate phage
identified and grown.

Phages are currently being used therapeutically to treat bacterial infections
that do not respond to conventional antibiotics, particularly in Russia[4] and
Georgia.[5][6][7] They tend to be more successful than antibiotics where there
is a biofilm covered by a polysaccharide layer, which antibiotics typically
cannot penetrate.[8] In the West, no therapies are currently authorized for
use on humans, although phages for killing food poisoning bacteria (Listeria)
are now in use.[9]

