---
title: Top Ten Genomes - (viii) Trichomonas vaginalis
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
E. coli genome has only 4,500 genes, which is the approximate count for most
other prokaryotic genomes. Eukaryotic yeast genome has ~6000 genes, and human
and most vertebrates have 20,000-25,000 coding genes. In contrast, the genome
of unicellular eukaryotic protist _Trichomonas vaginalis_ has almost 60,000
genes !!!
<!--more-->

[DRAFT GENOME SEQUENCE OF THE SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED PATHOGEN TRICHOMONAS
VAGINALIS](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/315/5809/207.full)

> We describe the genome sequence of the protist Trichomonas vaginalis, a
sexually transmitted human pathogen. Repeats and transposable elements
comprise about two-thirds of the ?160-megabase genome, reflecting a recent
massive expansion of genetic material. This expansion, in conjunction with the
shaping of metabolic pathways that likely transpired through lateral gene
transfer from bacteria, and amplification of specific gene families implicated
in pathogenesis and phagocytosis of host proteins may exemplify adaptations of
the parasite during its transition to a urogenital environment. The genome
sequence predicts previously unknown functions for the hydrogenosome, which
support a common evolutionary origin of this unusual organelle with
mitochondria.

T. vaginalis wins our nomination for having such a large genome count. It is
the kind of genome that gets Dan Graur curious about understanding the
biological implications having so many genes. Graur is currently writing a
book on genome architecture.

[The parasite Trichomonas vaginalis expresses thousands of pseudogenes and
long non-coding RNAs independently from functional neighbouring
genes](http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/15/906)

>

Background

The human pathogen Trichomonas vaginalis is a parabasalian flagellate that is
estimated to infect 3% of the worlds population annually. With a 160 megabase
genome and up to 60,000 genes residing in six chromosomes, the parasite has
the largest genome among sequenced protists. Although it is thought that the
genome size and unusual large coding capacity is owed to genome duplication
events, the exact reason and its consequences are less well studied.

Results

Among transcriptome data we found thousands of instances, in which reads
mapped onto genomic loci not annotated as genes, some reaching up to several
kilobases in length. At first sight these appear to represent long non-coding
RNAs (lncRNAs), however, about half of these lncRNAs have significant sequence
similarities to genomic loci annotated as protein-coding genes. This provides
evidence for the transcription of hundreds of pseudogenes in the parasite.
Conventional lncRNAs and pseudogenes are expressed in Trichomonas through
their own transcription start sites and independently from flanking genes in
Trichomonas. Expression of several representative lncRNAs was verified through
reverse-transcriptase PCR in different T.?vaginalis strains and case studies
exclude the use of alternative start codons or stop codon suppression for the
genes analysed.

Conclusion

Our results demonstrate that T.?vaginalis expresses thousands of intergenic
loci, including numerous transcribed pseudogenes. In contrast to yeast these
are expressed independently from neighbouring genes. Our results furthermore
illustrate the effect genome duplication events can have on the transcriptome
of a protist. The parasites genome is in a steady state of changing and we
hypothesize that the numerous lncRNAs could offer a large pool for potential
innovation from which novel proteins or regulatory RNA units could evolve.

