---
title: How Much Will the Americans Suffer, If NIH Shuts Down?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
This is the third and final post of our series critically reexamining Francis
Collins' claim that the existence of NIH contributes to health improvement of
Americans. Collins used life expectancy at birth as a good measure of success
and we do the same.
<!--more-->

In the previous two posts ("[Francis Collins Admits NIH Under Him Has Been
Failing](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/01/22/francis-collins-admits-
nih-under-him-has-been-failing/)" and "[Report from Asia Will Asia Unfollow
NIHs Failed Research Model?](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/03/31
/report-from-asia-will-asia-unfollow-nihs-failed-research-model/)"), we showed
that the life expectancy at birth of USAians is lower than all advanced
countries. Even the residents of some countries bombed or wrecked by Americans
three or four decades now caught up with USA. However, today's number will
absolutely surprise you.

![images](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/images.jpg)

How much will the life expectancy at birth of Americans fall, if NIH shuts
down? To add to the misery, all people of the country (USA) will be placed
into slums in an area no more than two times the size of Massachusetts and
bombed periodically. The answer is that the life expectancy will fall by only
five years. The evidence is
[here](http://www.indexmundi.com/g/g.aspx?c=gz&v=30) in the life expectancy at
birth at Gaza strip -

![indexmundi_ex30](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/04/indexmundi_ex30-300x150.png)

To understand that the Gaza strip number is not a measurement error, we can
also check Lebanon, a country neighboring Israel and Palestine. The life
expectancy at birth there is higher than USA.

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/04/Capture1-300x189.png)

The above numbers should destroy any myth that NIH and its precision medicine
scams contribute to human health. Instead of sending misleading stats to
public, Francis Collins should dramatically scale down the wasteful programs
starting with shutting down of NHGRI.

[Lets Discuss Is it Time to Shut Down
NHGRI?](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/01/09/lets-discuss-is-it-time-
to-shut-down-nhgri/)

