---
title: Notch Signaling - Where Did it Come from? (four papers)
categories:
- ncRNA
---
**1\. Notchless, a component of the pathway, is present in plant and yeast -**
<!--more-->

[From the Notch Signaling Pathway to Ribosome
Biogenesis](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2634047/)

> Nearly 240 WD repeat proteins have been identified from the Arabidopsis
genome. Among these, some well characterized WDR proteins were shown to
regulate various developmental processes in plants.1 We have recently isolated
in Solanum chacoense a homolog of the Drosophila NOTCHLESS gene. In
Drosophila, NOTCHLESS regulates the activity of the Notch signaling pathway
through a direct interaction with the intracellular domain of the Notch
receptor. Although the Notch signaling pathway does not exist in yease and
plants, the NLE gene is conserved in animals, plants and yeast. Furthermore,
functional conservation was suggested by expression of the plant NLE gene in
Drosophila. In plants, underexpression of the plant NLE gene altered numerous
developmental processes including seed development, and resulted in reduced
aerial organ size and organ numbers, in delayed flowering, and in an increased
stomatal index. Surprisingly, the link between these pleiotropic phenotypes is
the recently discovered of the involvement of NLE in ribosome biogenesis,
emphasizing its role in proper cellular growth and proliferation during plant
development.

**2\. Phylogeny analysis -**

[Origin and evolution of the Notch signalling pathway: an overview from
eukaryotic genomes](http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/9/249)

> Background

Of the 20 or so signal transduction pathways that orchestrate cell-cell
interactions in metazoans, seven are involved during development. One of these
is the Notch signalling pathway which regulates cellular identity,
proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis via the developmental processes
of lateral inhibition and boundary induction. In light of this essential role
played in metazoan development, we surveyed a wide range of eukaryotic genomes
to determine the origin and evolution of the components and auxiliary factors
that compose and modulate this pathway.

Results

We searched for 22 components of the Notch pathway in 35 different species
that represent 8 major clades of eukaryotes, performed phylogenetic analyses
and compared the domain compositions of the two fundamental molecules: the
receptor Notch and its ligands Delta/Jagged. We confirm that a Notch pathway,
with true receptors and ligands is specific to the Metazoa. This study also
sheds light on the deep ancestry of a number of genes involved in this
pathway, while other members are revealed to have a more recent origin. The
origin of several components can be accounted for by the shuffling of pre-
existing protein domains, or via lateral gene transfer. In addition, certain
domains have appeared de novo more recently, and can be considered metazoan
synapomorphies.

Conclusion

The Notch signalling pathway emerged in Metazoa via a diversity of molecular
mechanisms, incorporating both novel and ancient protein domains during
eukaryote evolution. Thus, a functional Notch signalling pathway was probably
present in Urmetazoa.

**3\. Conceptual paper from 2006 -**

[Evolutionary Origins of Notch Signaling in Early
Development](http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.4161/cc.5.3.2396)

> Notch signaling is known to play key roles in early embryonic development
and in the specification or patterning of germ layers in several lower
organisms. Thus it is surprising that the removal of maternal and zygotic
protein O-fucosyltransferase 1 (Pofut1), an essential component of the
canonical Notch signaling pathway, does not affect early embryogenesis in the
mouse.1 Mouse embryos lacking Pofut1 develop normally through blastogenesis to
E8.0 when all three germ layers have formed.1 Here we summarize roles for
Notch signaling in early embryonic development of several species, and discuss
the potential evolutionary origins of these roles. We propose that Notch
signaling might have first been used in the common ancestor of the metazoa for
certain advanced developmental processes such as segmentation, and only later
in evolution been coopted for use at early stages of embryogenesis in some
organisms.

**4\. Conceptual paper from 2011 -**

[Notch signaling: simplicity in design, versatility in
function](http://dev.biologists.org/content/138/17/3593.full)

> Notch signaling is evolutionarily conserved and operates in many cell types
and at various stages during development. Notch signaling must therefore be
able to generate appropriate signaling outputs in a variety of cellular
contexts. This need for versatility in Notch signaling is in apparent contrast
to the simple molecular design of the core pathway. Here, we review recent
studies in nematodes, Drosophila and vertebrate systems that begin to shed
light on how versatility in Notch signaling output is generated, how signal
strength is modulated, and how cross-talk between the Notch pathway and other
intracellular signaling systems, such as the Wnt, hypoxia and BMP pathways,
contributes to signaling diversity.

