---
title: Repetitive Elements May Comprise Over Two-Thirds of the Human Genome
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
[This paper](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3228813/) from 2011
is a good example of what scientists do, if they do not get showered with
money from various government agencies. (Hint. They end up discovering the
truth.)
<!--more-->

> Transposable elements (TEs) are conventionally identified in eukaryotic
genomes by alignment to consensus element sequences. Using this approach,
about half of the human genome has been previously identified as TEs and low-
complexity repeats. We recently developed a highly sensitive alternative de
novo strategy, P-clouds, that instead searches for clusters of high-abundance
oligonucleotides that are related in sequence space (oligo clouds). We show
here that P-clouds predicts >840 Mbp of additional repetitive sequences in the
human genome, thus suggesting that 66%69% of the human genome is repetitive or
repeat-derived. To investigate this remarkable difference, we conducted
detailed analyses of the ability of both P-clouds and a commonly used
conventional approach, RepeatMasker (RM), to detect different sized fragments
of the highly abundant human Alu and MIR SINEs. RM can have surprisingly low
sensitivity for even moderately long fragments, in contrast to P-clouds, which
has good sensitivity down to small fragment sizes (?25 bp). Although short
fragments have a high intrinsic probability of being false positives, we
performed a probabilistic annotation that reflects this fact. We further
developed element-specific P-clouds (ESPs) to identify novel Alu and MIR SINE
elements, and using it we identified ?100 Mb of previously unannotated human
elements. ESP estimates of new MIR sequences are in good agreement with RM-
based predictions of the amount that RM missed. These results highlight the
need for combined, probabilistic genome annotation approaches and **suggest
that the human genome consists of substantially more repetitive sequence than
previously believed.**

\--------------------------------------------------------------

Quite the opposite happens with too much money.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/Y3V2thsJ1Wc" frameborder="0"> </iframe>
