---
title: The Genome Institute and Its Role - Ken Weiss
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Readers will enjoy a thoughtful blog post from [professor Ken
Weiss](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/07/30/battle-over-gwas-ken-weiss-
edition/) in response to - "[Lets Discuss Is it Time to Shut Down
NHGRI?](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/01/09/lets-discuss-is-it-time-
to-shut-down-nhgri/)". With his permission, we are reblogging it entirely
below, but please feel free to comment in his blog.
<!--more-->

As an aside, while discussing this topic privately with other scientists, I
noticed an attitude that there is no harm in NHGRI wasting money as long as it
also funds good projects (i.e. their projects). In their (implied) view, the
money comes from taxpayers, who are born suckers anyway. I do not agree with
this notion, and can argue that NHGRI's funding of poor quality science
actually damages good science. I will share one such example in the following
blog post.

\------------------------------------------------------

Reblogged from [The Mermaid's Tale](http://ecodevoevo.blogspot.com/2015/01
/the-genome-institute-and-its-role.html) blog.

The NIH-based Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI) has for a long time been
funding the Big Data kinds of science that is growing like mushrooms on the
funding landscape. Even if overall funding is constrained, and even if this
also applies to the NHGRI (I don't happen to know), the sequestration of funds
in too-big-to-stop projects is clear. Even Francis Collins and some NIH
efforts to reinvigorate individual-investigator RO1 awards don't really seem
to have stopped the grab for Big Data funds.

That's quite natural. If your career, status, or lab depends on how much money
you bring into your institution, or how many papers you publish, or how many
post-docs you have in your stable, or your salary and space depend on that,
you will have to respond in ways that generate those score-counting coups.
You'll naturally exaggerate the importance of your findings, run quickly to
the public news media, and do whatever other manipulations you can to further
your career. If you have a big lab and the prestige and local or even broader
influence that goes with that, you won't give that up easily so that others,
your juniors or even competitors can have smaller projects instead. In our
culture, who could blame you?

But some bloggers, Tweeters, and Commenters have been asking if there is a
solution to this kind of fund sequestration, largely reserved (even if
informally) for the big usually private universities. The arguments have
ranged from asking if the NHGRI should be shut down (e.g.,
[here](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/01/09/lets-discuss-is-it-time-to-
shut-down-nhgri/)) to just groping for suggestions. Since many of these
questions have been addressed to me, I thought I would chime in briefly.

First, a bit of history or perspective, as informally seen over the years from
my own perspective (that is, not documented or intended to be precise, but a
broad view as I saw things):

The NHGRI was located administratively where it was for reasons I dont know.
Several federal institutes were supporting scientific research. NIH was about
health, and health 'sells', and understandably a lot of fund is committed to
health research. It was natural to think that genome sequences and sciences
would have major health implications, if the theory that genes are the
fundamental causal elements of life was in fact true. Initially James Watson,
discoverer of DNA's structure, and perhaps others advocated the effort. He was
succeeded by Francis Collins who is a physician and clever politician.

However, there was competition for the genome territory, at least with the
Atomic Energy Commission. I dont know if NSF was ever in the race to fund
genomic research, but one driving force at the time was the fear of mutations
that atomic radiation (therapeutic, from wars, diagnostic tests, and weapons
fallout) generated. There was also a race with the private sector, notably
Celera as a commercial competitor that would privatize the genome sequence. Dr
Collins prominently, successfully, and fortunately defended the idea of open
and free public access. The effort was seen as important for many reasons,
including commercial ones, and there were international claimants in Japan,
the UK, and perhaps elsewhere, that wanted to be in on the act. So the
politics were rife as well as the science, understandably.

It is possible that only with the health-related promises was enough funding
going to be available, although nuclear fears about mutations and the Cold War
probably contributed, along with the usual less savory for self-interest, to
AEC's interests.

Once a basic human genome sequence was available, there was no slowing the
train. Technology, including public and private innovation promised much
quicker sequencing in the future, that was quickly to become available even to
ordinary labs (like mine, at the time!). And once the Genome Institute (and
other places such as the Sanger Centre in Britain and centers in Japan, China,
and elsewhere) were established, they weren't going to close down! So other
sequences entered the picture--microbes, other species, and so on.

It became a fad and an internecine competition within NIH. I know from
personal experiences at the time that program managers felt the need to do
'genomics' so they would be in on the act and keep their budgets. They had to
contribute funds, in some way I don't recall, to the NHGRI's projects or in
other ways keep their portfolios by having genomics as part of this. -Omics
sprung up like weeds, and new fields such as nutrigenomics, cancer genomics,
microbiomics and many more began to pull in funding, and institutes (and the
investigators across the country) hopped aboard. Imitation, especially when
funds and current fashion are involved, is not at all a surprise, and
efficiency or relative payoff in results took the inevitable back seat:
promises rather than deliveries naturally triumphed.

In many ways this has led to the current of exhaustively enumerative Big Data:
a return to 17th century induction. This has to do not just with competition
for resources, but a changed belief system also spurred by computing power:
Just sample everything and pattern will emerge!

Over the decades the biomedical (and to some lesser extent biological)
university establishment grew on the back of the external funding which was so
generous for so long. But it has led to a dependency. Along with exponential
growth in the number of competitors, hierarchies of elite research groups
developed--another natural human tendency. We all know the career limitations
that are resulting from this. And competition has meant that deans and chairs
expect investigators always to be funded, in part because there aren't
internal funds to keep labs running in the absence of grants. It's been a
vicious self-reinforcing circle over the past 50 years.

As hierarchies built, private donors were convinced (conned?) into believing
that their largesse would lead to the elimination of target diseases ('target'
often meaning those in the rich donors' families). Big Data today is the
grandchild of the major projects, like the Manhattan Project in WWII, that
showed that some kinds of science could be done on a large scale. Many, many
projects during past decades showed something else: Fund a big project, and
you can't pull the plug on it! It becomes too entrenched politically.

The precedents were not lost on investigators! Plead for bigger, longer
studies, with very large investments, and you have a safe bet for decades,
perhaps your whole career. Once started, cost-benefit analysis has a hard time
paring back, much less stopping such projects. There are many examples, and I
won't single any of them out. But after some early splash, by and large they
have got to diminishing returns but not got to any real sense of termination:
too big to kill.

This is to some extent the same story with the NHGRI. The NIH has got too
enamored of Big Data to keep the NHGRI as limited or focused as perhaps it
should have been (or should be). In a sense it became an openly anti-focused-
research sugar daddy (Dr Collins said, perhaps officially, that NHGRI didnt
fund hypothesis-based research) based on pure inductionism and reductionism,
so it did not have to have well-posed questions. It basically bragged about
not being focused.

This could be a change in the nature of science, driven by technology, that is
obsolescing the nature of science that was set in motion in the Enlightenment
era, by the likes of Galileo, Newton, Bacon, Descartes and others. We'll see.
But the socioeconomic, political sides of things are part of the process, and
that may not be a good thing.

Will focused, hypothesis-based research make a comeback? Not if Big Data
yields great results, but decades of it, no matter how fancy, have not shown
the major payoff that has been promised. Indeed, historians of science often
write that the rationale, that if you collect enough data its patterns (that
is, a theory) will emerge, has rarely been realized. Selective retrospective
examples don't carry the weight often given them.

There is also our cultural love affair with science. We know very clearly that
many things we might do at very low cost would yield health benefits far
exceeding even the rosy promises of the genomic lobby. Most are lifestyle
changes. For example, even geneticists would (privately, at least) acknowledge
that if every 'diabetes' gene variant were fixed, only a small fraction of
diabetes cases would be eliminated. The recent claim that much of cancer is
due just to bad mutational luck has raised lots of objections--in large part
because Big Data researchers' business would be curtailed. Everyone knows
these things.

What would it take to kill the Big Data era, given the huge array of
commercial, technological, and professional commitments we have built, if it
doesn't actually pay off on its promises? Is focused science a nostalgic
illusion? No matter what, we have a major vested interest on a huge scale in
the NHGRI and other similar institutes elsewhere, and grantees in medical
schools are a privileged, very well-heeled lot, regardless of whether their
research is yielding what it promises.

Or, put another way, where are the areas in which Big Data of the genomic sort
might actually pay, and where is this just funding-related institutional and
cultural momentum? How would we decide?

So what do to? It won't happen, but in my view the NHGRI does not, and never
did, belong properly in NIH. It should have been in NSF, where basic science
is done. Only when clearly relevant to disease should genomics be funded for
that purpose (and by NIH, not NSF). It should be focused on soluble problems
in that context.

NIH funds the greedy maw of medical schools. The faculty don't work for the
university, but for NIH. Their idea of 'teaching' often means giving 5-10
lectures a year that mainly consist of self-promoting reports about their
labs, perhaps the talks they've just given at some meeting somewhere. Salaries
are much higher than at non-medical universities--but in my view grants simply
should not pay faculty salaries. Universities should. If research is part of
your job's requirements, its their job to pay you. Grants should cover
research staff, supplies and so on.

Much of this could happen (in principle) if the NHGRI were transferred to NSF
and had to fund on an NSF-level budget policy. Smaller amounts, to more
people, on focussed basic research. The same total budget would go a lot
farther, and if it were restricted to non-medical school investigators there
would be the additional payoff that most of them actually teach, so that they
disseminate the knowledge to large numbers of students who can then go out
into the private sector and apply what they've learned. That's an old-
fashioned, perhaps nostalgic(?) view of what being a 'professor' should mean.

Major pare-backs of grant size and duration could be quite salubrious for
science, making it more focused and in that sense accountable. The employment
problem for scientists could also be ameliorated. Of course, in a transition
phase, universities would have to learn how to actually pay their employees.

Of course, it won't happen, even if it would work, because it's so against the
current power structure of science. And although Dr Collins has threatened to
fund more small RO1 grants it isn't clear how or whether that will really
happen. That's because there doesn't seem to be any real will to change among
enough people with the leverage to make it happen, and the newcomers who would
benefit are, like all such grass-roots elements, not unified enough.

These are just some thoughts, or assertions, or day-dreams about the evolution
of science in the developed world over the last 50 years or so. Clearly there
is widespread discontent, clearly there is large funding going on with
proportionately little results. Major results in biomedical areas can't be
expected over night. But we might expect that research had more
accountability.

