---
title: Pevzner and Compeau Are Splitting Their Bioinformatics Course into Three
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Here is great news for busy people interested in learning bioinformatics from
the masters. This year, Pevzner and Compeau are splitting their Bioinformatics
I course in Coursera into three independent courses. Self-learners can also
try youtube videos from last year
[here](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/11/03/study-bioinformatics-
algorithms-from-youtube-videos/), and use problem-solving tool
[Rosalind](http://rosalind.info/problems/locations/). We reviewed their
excellent book [here](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/07/30/a-review-of-
bioinformatics-algorithms-an-active-learning-approach-by-compeau-and-
pevzner/).
<!--more-->

The three-part courses are listed below -

[Finding Hidden Messages in DNA (Bioinformatics
I)](https://www.coursera.org/course/hiddenmessages)

> This course begins a series of classes illustrating the power of computing
in modern biology. Please join us on the frontier of bioinformatics to look
for hidden messages in DNA without ever needing to put on a lab coat. After
warming up our algorithmic muscles, we will learn how randomized algorithms
can be used to solve problems in bioinformatics.

[Assembling Genomes and Sequencing Antibiotics (Bioinformatics
II)](https://www.coursera.org/course/assembly)

> Biologists still cannot read the nucleotides of an entire genome or the
amino acids of an antibiotic as you would read a book from beginning to end.
However, they can read short pieces of DNA and weigh small antibiotic
fragments. In this course, we will see how graph theory and brute force
algorithms can be used to reconstruct genomes and antibiotics.

[Comparing Genes, Proteins, and Genomes (Bioinformatics
III)](https://www.coursera.org/course/comparinggenomes)

> After sequencing genomes, we would like to compare them. We will see that
dynamic programming is a powerful algorithmic tool when we compare two genes
(i.e., short sequences of DNA) or two proteins. When we "zoom out" to compare
entire genomes, we will employ combinatorial algorithms.

