---
title: "'Scripting for Biology' Module - for Students living in Asia"
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
![Asia_\(orthographic_projection\).svg](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/10/Asia_orthographic_projection.svg_.png)
<!--more-->

Dear Readers,

When we announced the earlier module ([Scripting for Biology Online Virtual
Classroom-based Module](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/09/01/scripting-
for-biology-online-virtual-classroom-based-module/)), we received a number of
requests from Asian countries and sadly could not include them due to the
differences with US time zone. This time, we are starting a new module to be
held in Asian daytime so that students from Asia can participate.

The objective of this module is to introduce those, who never did programming,
to scripting languages like python, PERL and GO.** Classes will start from Oct
23 and take place every Friday at 1 PM Chinese time and or 10:30 AM Indian
time. Please email pandora@homolog.us, if you like to join.**

The classes are chat-based and, in parallel, students write their code by
logging into cloud accounts provided by us. We monitor the code they are
writing and help each of them individually (through private message), if they
are stuck. The examples we choose are related to solving biological problems,
but they also illustrate various computer science issues (algorithm,, data
structure, scaling) at an introductory level. For the current module, we
initially allocated 1 hour 15 minutes per class, but the discussions tend to
continue for 1.5-2 hours. Therefore, in the new module, we are allocating at
least 2 hours for each session.

Using our current experience, we are making changes to the format in how the
topics are being taught. In the new format, the topic will be split into eight
levels, and students, who are comfortable with one level, can proceed to the
next one. That way, if someone misses a class or finds the topic for a day
difficult, that student can repeat the same level instead of being forced to
proceed to the next level. Everyday there will be eight chat-based classrooms
open for eight levels, and each student will join one of those rooms on a day.

We are working on posting all course-related materials online so that the
topics being taught at each level become clear. Moreover, students will have
access to their chat transcript and cloud account outside class hours so that
they can practice in their own time from the posted materials. Based on
feedback we received from the current module, students are finding the chat
transcripts very useful.

Please email pandora@homolog.us, if you like to join.

