---
title: Homolog.us Introduces Video Interview Series with Respected Scientists
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Dear Readers,
<!--more-->

Over the last few months, we spoke with a number of scientists solving
fundamental problems in biology and proposed about having video interviews to
discuss their interesting work to our audience. We are fortunate that almost
all of them agreed. Given that our community includes many computational
biologists and others working on next-generation sequencing, we will make sure
to ask them about computational challenges they face.

Many of our guests are working on evolutionary developmental biology (evo-
devo), which not only is the most interesting area of biology, but it also
appears as the most promising in terms of finding cures for diseases. As you
are aware, [2012 Milennium Technology
prize](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Millennium_Technology_Prize) was offered
to Linus Torvalds and Shinya Yamanaka. So, if you are using linux computers
and not doing evo-devo, you are likely missing half the fun (and promises) :).
Jokes apart, a number of genome projects are trying to connect between the
genomes and unusual phenotype of various organisms (e.g. [explaining the
evolution of electric organ from genome in our
case](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/344/6191/1522)), and they will
definitely find these discussions informative.

![davidson-copy](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2015/05
/davidson-copy-197x300.jpg)

![ZIM00188](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/06/ZIM00188.jpg)

We are honored to have Professor Isabelle Peter and Professor Eric Davidson of
Caltech as our first guests. They will be talking about their recent book
[discussed here in our blog](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/05/01/a
-must-read-book-if-you-like-to-understand-genomes/). Dr. Davidson knew all
about the architectures of large eukaryotes genomes by late 1960s and early
1970s, when he published a series of insightful papers with Roy Britten
characterizing various genomes. It is amazing how much they could say about
the genome organizations and its evolutionary implications without any multi-
million dollar sequencing facility.
[Here](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3340058/) is what professor
Davidson wrote about their first comparative genomics project -

> Two interesting episodes hung on our investigations of genomic sequence
organization in the early 1970s. At that time, I was Director of the MBL
Embryology Course; one summer, Roy and I took our hydroxyapatite columns to
Woods Hole, and we entrained the whole class into examining sequence
organization in every marine creature that we could get DNA out of from
jellyfish to oysters and horseshoe crabs. We discovered that genomic sequence
organization is amazingly variable: some genomes seemed to contain relatively
huge amounts of repetitive sequence, others lacked almost any short
interspersed repeat sequences, which was found in Drosophila, and other
genomes were organized, like human, sea urchin, and Xenopus DNA. These
differences are the rapidly evolving legacies of distinct histories of genomic
mobile element infestation, and as quickly became apparent, gross sequence
organization evidently had nothing to do with long-distance phylogenetic
relations.

Since 1970s, Dr. Davidson has been working toward connecting the genome
sequence with the development and evolution of animal body plan, and his
latest book with Dr. Peter is the result of successful collaboration over
nearly a decade. Therefore, I believe everyone trying to understand various
genome sequences will get ideas from the interview ([and the book, of
course](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/05/01/a-must-read-book-if-you-
like-to-understand-genomes/)).

Our readers may also note that Dr. Davidson, Dr. McClay and Dr. Peter is
offering a course on Gene Regulatory Networks for Development at Woods Hole.
The announcement is attached below.

\-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

> Please circulate to interested graduate students and post-docs.

An advanced short course Gene Regulatory Networks for Development will be
given at the Marine Biological Laboratory at Woods Hole, MA, October 11-23,
2015. This will be the 8th edition of this unique Course, which is open to
graduate students, postdocs, PIs or anyone else who might profit from a fast
moving treatment of this new field. The Network Course is an intense and
always interesting experience. The Course covers structure and function of
genomically encoded gene regulatory networks (GRNs) controlling many
developmental processes, from biological, modeling, and quantitative
viewpoints. Its subject matter ranges from informational and mechanistic
aspects of transcription control systems to applications of GRNs in diverse
developmental and evolutionary contexts. The Course, which is supported by
NICHD, has drawn rave reviews in all of its previous incarnations. This years
Faculty is a stellar lineup:

Scott Barolo, University of Michigan

James Briscoe, MRC National Institute for Medical Research, London

Martha Bulyk, Harvard Med. School

Justin Kumar, Indiana U.

Arthur Lander, University of California Irvine

Bill Longabaugh, Institute for Systems Biology

Roger Patient, University of Oxford

Ellen Rothenberg, Caltech

Harinder Singh, Cincinnnati Childrens Hospital Medical Center

Isabelle Peter, Caltech, Course Assistant Director

David McClay, Duke University, Course Co-Director

Eric Davidson, Caltech, Course Co-Director

A course syllabus and poster for 2015 are attached [Edit. Please email me at
samanta at homolog.us for a copy of course syllabus and poster].

Applications are due July 29, 2015 (Some fellowships and travel assistance are

available on request).

Application: <https://ws2.mbl.edu/StudentApp/StudentApp.asp?CourseID=GERN>

