---
title: Solute Carrier Proteins and Their Therapeutic Implication
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
These days, when we analyze transcriptome data sets from vetebrates, one or
other solute carrier gene often comes to the top. If have the same experience
and spend a lot of time searching through various databases to find what they
do, the following two reviews will come handy. The first author of both papers
is Matthias A. Hediger, who is currently at Institute of Biochemistry and
Molecular Medicine, University of Bern, Switzerland.
<!--more-->

One part of the paper you may find very handy is the large table (Table 1)
describing solute carrier nomenclature. Solute carrier proteins transport
materials inside the cell, and each SLC represents protein family carrying one
type of material. For example, SLC48 is the heme transporter and SLC14 family
transports urea.

Enjoy !

[The ABCs of membrane transporters in health and disease (SLC series): Introdu
ction](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0098299712001434)

> The field of transport biology has steadily grown over the past decade and
is now recognized as playing an important role in manifestation and treatment
of disease. The SLC (solute carrier) gene series has grown to now include 52
families and 395 transporter genes in the human genome. A list of these genes
can be found at the HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee (HGNC) website (see
www.genenames.org/genefamilies/SLC). This special issue features mini-reviews
for each of these SLC families written by the experts in each field. The
existing online resource for solute carriers, the Bioparadigms SLC Tables
(www.bioparadigms.org), has been updated and significantly extended with
additional information and cross-links to other relevant databases, and the
nomenclature used in this database has been validated and approved by the
HGNC. In addition, the Bioparadigms SLC Tables functionality has been improved
to allow easier access by the scientific community. This introduction
includes: an overview of all known SLC and non-SLC transporter genes; a list
of transporters of water soluble vitamins; a summary of recent progress in the
structure determination of transporters (including GLUT1/SLC2A1); roles of
transporters in human diseases and roles in drug approval and pharmaceutical
perspectives.

[The ABCs of solute carriers: physiological, pathological and therapeutic
implications of human membrane transport
proteins](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14624363)

> The Human Genome Organisation (HUGO) Nomenclature Committee Database
provides a list of transporter families of the solute carrier (SLC) gene
series (see http://www.gene.ucl.ac.uk/nomenclature/). Currently, it includes
43 families and 298 transporter genes. This special issue features mini-
reviews on each of these SLC families written by the experts in each field. A
WEB site has been established (http://www.pharmaconference.org/slctable.asp)
that gives the latest updates for the SLC families and their members as well
as relevant links to gene databases and reviews in the literature. A list of
all currently known SLC families, a discussion of additional SLC families and
family members as well as a brief summary of non-SLC transporter genes is
included in this introduction.

