---
title: Evolutionary Biologists to Follow - Sally Leys and Casey Dunn
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
If there is one area of evolutionary biology benefiting greatly from high-
throughput sequencing, that is the study of 'primitive' or 'lower' animals.
The animals like sponges were traditionally avoided in the era of model
organisms, because what can one really learn about humans based on brainless,
heartless and limbless 'simple' animals? Surprisingly, high-throughput
sequencing found those animals not to be as simple as previously thought. It
is also worth pointing out the roles of two researchers ([Sally
Leys](http://www.biology.ualberta.ca/faculty/sally_leys/) and [Casey
Dunn](http://dunnlab.org/)), who are truly pushing the boundaries by taking
advantage of new sequencing techniques and asking interesting questions.
<!--more-->

\---------------------------------------------

**Six major steps in animal evolution: are we derived sponge larvae?**

The importance of sponges and choanoflagellates in understanding evolution
were highlighted in [a 2009 review paper](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/1
0.1111/j.1525-142X.2008.00231.x/abstract) by Claud Nielsen of Natural History
Museum of Denmark. [Dr.
Nielsen](http://snm.ku.dk/english/staffsnm/staff/?pure=en/persons/157111) was
the past president of International Society for Invertebrate Morphology,
[winner of Linnean Medal](http://snm.ku.dk/english/news/all_news/2015/danish-
evolutionary-biologist-receives-prestigious-international-price/) and the
author of widely cited book ['Animal Evolution: Interrelationships of the
Living Phyla'](http://www.amazon.com/Claus-Nielsen/e/B001HORH68). In the paper
he wrote -

> A review of the old and new literature on animal morphology/embryology and
molecular studies has led me to the following scenario for the early evolution
of the metazoans. The metazoan ancestor, choanoblastaea, was a pelagic sphere
consisting of choanocytes. The evolution of multicellularity enabled division
of labor between cells, and an advanced choanoblastaea consisted of
choanocytes and nonfeeding cells. Polarity became established, and an adult,
sessile stage developed. Choanocytes of the upper side became arranged in a
groove with the cilia pumping water along the groove. Cells overarched the
groove so that a choanocyte chamber was formed, establishing the body plan of
an adult sponge; the pelagic larval stage was retained but became
lecithotrophic. The sponges radiated into monophyletic Silicea, Calcarea, and
Homoscleromorpha. Homoscleromorph larvae show cell layers resembling true,
sealed epithelia. A homoscleromorph-like larva developed an archenteron, and
the sealed epithelium made extracellular digestion possible in this isolated
space. This larva became sexually mature, and the adult sponge-stage was
abandoned in an extreme progenesis. This eumetazoan ancestor, gastraea,
corresponds to Haeckel's gastraea. Trichoplax represents this stage, but with
the blastopore spread out so that the endoderm has become the underside of the
creeping animal. Another lineage developed a nervous system; this
neurogastraea is the ancestor of the Neuralia. Cnidarians have retained this
organization, whereas the Triploblastica (Ctenophora+Bilateria), have
developed the mesoderm. The bilaterians developed bilaterality in a primitive
form in the Acoelomorpha and in an advanced form with tubular gut and long Hox
cluster in the Eubilateria (Protostomia+Deuterostomia).

It is indicated that the major evolutionary steps are the result of suites of
existing genes becoming co-opted into new networks that specify new
structures.

The evolution of the eumetazoan ancestor from a progenetic homoscleromorph
larva implies that we, as well as all the other eumetazoans, are derived
sponge larvae.

\---------------------------------------------

**The hidden biology of sponges and ctenophores**

In a review paper published in Trends in Ecology and Evolution, Casey Dunn,
Sally Leys and Steven Haddock went a step further and challenged the notion of
human-centric understanding of animals like sponges and ctenophores. The
concept of 'hidden biology' is explained in Fig 1 of their paper and is shown
below along with the extended caption (Box 1).

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/07/Capture5-300x276.png)

> All living animals belong to one of five clades: Porifera, Ctenophora,
Placozoa, Cnidaria, and Bilateria. To a first approximation, the study of
zoology is the study of Bilateria. Humans and all the best-studied model
animal species (mouse, Drosophila melanogaster, Caenorhabditis elegans, and
others) are within Bilateria. All of the terrestrial animals, and most
freshwater animals that humans regularly encounter are within Bilateria. Most
known animal species are within Bilateria (in fact, most known species belong
to a single bilaterian clade: Arthropoda). However, if we want to understand
the full breadth of animal diversity and the earliest events in animal
evolution, we need to study all animals, not just Bilateria.

To a large extent, the focus on the study of bilaterians is a resource
allocation decisions: zoologists spend more time and money studying
bilaterians than they do nonbilaterians because they comprise most living
animal species, including ourselves and the animals we are most familiar with.
However, this creates a problem: currently, we see most nonbilaterian biology
through the filter of bilaterian biology (Figure I). All animal clades have a
mix of unique traits and traits that are shared with other animals (Figure
IA). It is easier to confirm previously known traits and functions than it is
to describe new traits and functions, and most previous studies have been on
bilaterians. In addition, many widely used tools and reagents have been
optimized for Bilateria. This makes it easier to study the aspects of
nonbilaterian biology that are similar to bilaterian biology (Figure IB,
gray), than it is to study traits that are only found outside Bilateria
(Figure IB, black). The candidate gene approach is a widespread example of
this. However, just because it is easiest to study the subset of nonbilaterian
biology that is shared with bilaterians does not mean that nonbilaterians only
have a subset of bilaterian biology, or that bilaterians are more advanced
than other animals. It just means that many of their unique features are
currently unknown to us: a hidden biology (Figure I) that we have only the
first glimpses of. This hidden biology includes novel structures and
functions, facilitated by novel mechanisms, that are not found in bilaterian
model species. It also includes novel mechanisms that underlie shared
structures and functions. The problems of hidden biology also extend to
nonmodel bilaterians, although it is more severe in nonbilaterians.

What do we miss by letting so much nonbilaterian biology stay hidden? At best,
we miss out on some interesting biology, including unique morphology,
developmental mechanisms, and physiology. At worst, we are systematically
misled. Unfortunately, this is the case when it comes to understanding early
animal evolution. It is tempting to mistake our biased perspective (Figure IB)
for the actual distribution of traits (Figure IA), which gives the false
impressions that nonbilaterians have only a subset of the traits found in
Bilateria and, therefore, that they are lower or simpler. This in turn plays
into the misconception that living animal diversity conforms to a linear
aristotelian scala naturae, from lower to higher animals, and that animal
evolution has proceeded by a step-wise accumulation of complex traits, such
that the more distantly an animal is related to Bilateria, the more closely it
resembles the most recent common ancestor of all animals. In reality, all
living animal lineages have had the same amount of time to evolve since the
most recent common ancestor of all animals, and all have gain and lost
multiple traits. We need to understand the traits present in all animal
groups, not just those that are present in Bilateria, if we are to understand
early animal evolution.

\---------------------------------------------

**Sally Leys - Elements of a 'nervous system' in sponges**

![sleys](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/sleys.jpg)

The claims of complexity of sponges, jellies and ctenophores do not appear
far-fetched, if you go carefully through the papers of Dr. Sally Leys. For
years, she collaborated with George O. Mackie and showed that jellyfish had
central neural circuitry (check 2004 review ['Central Neural Circuitry in the
Jellyfish Aglantha'](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15004422)) and then
moved her attention to sponges. Her work combines traditional electrical
measurements and high-throughput sequencing. In the paper - ['Evolutionary
origins of sensation in metazoans: functional evidence for a new sensory organ
in sponges'](http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/14/3), she and co-authors
showed that sponges have sensory cilium.

> **Background**

One of the hallmarks of multicellular organisms is the ability of their cells
to trigger responses to the environment in a coordinated manner. In recent
years primary cilia have been shown to be present as antennae on almost all
animal cells, and are involved in cell-to-cell signaling in development and
tissue homeostasis; how this sophisticated sensory system arose has been
little-studied and its evolution is key to understanding how sensation arose
in the Animal Kingdom. Sponges (Porifera), one of the earliest evolving phyla,
lack conventional muscles and nerves and yet sense and respond to changes in
their fluid environment. Here we demonstrate the presence of non-motile cilia
in sponges and studied their role as flow sensors.

**Results**

Demosponges excrete wastes from their body with a stereotypic series of whole-
body contractions using a structure called the osculum to regulate the water-
flow through the body. In this study we show that short cilia line the inner
epithelium of the sponge osculum. Ultrastructure of the cilia shows an absence
of a central pair of microtubules and high speed imaging shows they are non-
motile, suggesting they are not involved in generating flow. In other animals
non-motile, primary, cilia are involved in sensation. Here we show that
molecules known to block cationic ion channels in primary cilia and which
inhibit sensory function in other organisms reduce or eliminate sponge
contractions. Removal of the cilia using chloral hydrate, or removal of the
whole osculum, also stops the contractions; in all instances the effect is
reversible, suggesting that the cilia are involved in sensation. An analysis
of sponge transcriptomes shows the presence of several transient receptor
potential (TRP) channels including PKD channels known to be involved in
sensing changes in flow in other animals. Together these data suggest that
cilia in sponge oscula are involved in flow sensation and coordination of
simple behaviour.

**Conclusions**

**This is the first evidence of arrays of non-motile cilia in sponge oscula. Our findings provide support for the hypothesis that the cilia are sensory, and if true, the osculum may be considered a sensory organ that is used to coordinate whole animal responses in sponges.** Arrays of primary cilia like these could represent the first step in the evolution of sensory and coordination systems in metazoans. 

In a separate paper - ['The analysis of eight transcriptomes from all Porifera
classes reveals surprising genetic complexity in sponges'](http://mbe.oxfordjo
urnals.org/content/early/2014/01/31/molbev.msu057.short?rss=1), her lab found
-

> Our analyses showed that all sponge classes share an unexpectedly large
complement of genes with other metazoans. Interestingly, hexactinellid,
calcareous and homoscleromorph sponges share more genes with bilaterians than
with non-bilaterian metazoans. We were surprised to find representatives of
most molecules involved in cell-cell communication, signaling, complex
epithelia, immune recognition and germ-lineage/sex, with only a few, but
potentially key, absences.

All those exciting results are summarized in her recent review - ['Elements of
a 'nervous system' in
sponges'](http://jeb.biologists.org/content/218/4/581.full.pdf+html).

\---------------------------------------------

**Casey Dunn and siphonophores**

![Dunn](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/Dunn-
208x300.jpg)

[Casey Dunn's lab](http://dunnlab.org/) focuses on siphonophores. If you do
not know anything about those strange animals, please take a look at [this
beautiful site](http://www.siphonophores.org/) prepared by him. In his
research, he combines biological methods and bioinformatics to study these
strange creatures, and we mentioned some of his papers [in the evolutionary
biology section](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/ncrna). Curious readers may start
from [his 2008 Nature
paper](http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v452/n7188/abs/nature06614.html)
and continue to two recent ones uploaded in biorxiv.

[The Histology of Nanomia bijuga (Hydrozoa:
Siphonophora)](http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2015/04/02/010868)

> The siphonophore Nanomia bijuga is a pelagic hydrozoan (Cnidaria) with
complex morphological organization. Each siphonophore is made up of many
asexually produced, genetically identical zooids that are functionally
specialized and morphologically distinct. These zooids predominantly arise by
budding in two growth zones, and are arranged in precise patterns. This study
describes the cellular anatomy of several zooid types as well as of the stem
and gas-filled float, called the pneumatophore. The distribution of cellular
morphologies across zooid types enhances our understanding of zooid function.
The unique absorptive cells in the palpon, for example, indicate specialized
intracellular digestive processing in this zooid type. Though cnidarians are
usually thought of as mono-epithelial, we characterize at least two cellular
populations in this species which are not connected to a basement membrane.
This work provides a greater understanding of epithelial diversity within the
cnidarians, and will be a foundation for future studies on Nanomia bijuga,
including functional assays and gene expression analyses.

[Stem cells in a colonial animal with localized growth
zones](http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2014/01/06/001685)

> Siphonophores (Hydrozoa) have unparalleled colony-level complexity,
precision of organization, and functional specialization between zooids (i.e.,
the units that make up colonies). Previous work has shown that, unlike other
colonial animals, most growth in siphonophores is restricted to one or two
well-defined growth zones that are the sites of both elongation and zooid
budding. To understand this unique growth at the cellular level, we
characterize the distribution of interstitial stem cells (i-cells) in the
siphonophore Nanomia bijuga. Within the colony we find that i-cells are
present at the tips of the growth zones, at well-defined sites where new zooid
buds will arise, and in the youngest zooid buds. As each zooid matures,
i-cells become progressively restricted to specific regions until they are
mostly absent from the oldest zooids. We find no evidence of the migratory
i-cells that have been observed in colonial cnidarian relatives. The
restriction of i-cells to particular developing structures and sites of growth
suggest a plant-like model of growth for siphonophores, where the growth zones
function much like meristems. This spatial restriction of stem cells could
also explain the precision of colony-level organization in siphonophores as a
consequence of restricted growth potential.

\---------------------------------------------

**Is animal evolution gain in complexity or rearrangement of existing complexity?**

All these exciting work may completely overhaul our understanding of
evolution. If sponges and jellies have the same genetic toolkit as humans and
functions like 'nervous system', is animal evolution rearrangement of existing
complexity prepackaged in unicellular protists, such as choanoflagelletes?
Does that mean the complexity came primarily from the unexplained evolution of
eukaryote from prokaryote? That is puzzling, because the
prokaryote-->eukaryote evolution is seen as saltatory based on evidences
collected so far. Hopefully, recent technological advances will help us
recover various missing blocks in fundamental understanding of evolution from
prokaryote-->eukaryote.

