---
title: TPP Intellectual Property Chapter is &ldquo;A Disaster for Global Health&rdquo;
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Leith van Onselen wrote in
[Macrobusiness](http://www.macrobusiness.com.au/2015/10/tpp-ip-chapter-a
-disaster-for-global-health/) \-
<!--more-->

> Wikileaks leaked the [final draft of the Intellectual Property
chapter](https://wikileaks.org/tpp-ip3/WikiLeaks-TPP-IP-Chapter/WikiLeaks-TPP-
IP-Chapter-051015.pdf) of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) over the
weekend, which has been panned by various experts.

Most notable of these is La Trobe Universtity lecturer in Public Health, Dr
Deborah Gleeson, who has [analysed the chapter](http://aftinet.org.au/cms/site
s/default/files/Gleeson%20comments%20on%20completed%20IP%20chapter.pdf
#overlay-context=users/editor) and concluded that it represents nothing less
than a disaster for global health.

Here are the specific quotes from [Dr Gleeson's critique](http://aftinet.org.a
u/cms/sites/default/files/Gleeson%20comments%20on%20completed%20IP%20chapter.p
df#overlay-context=users/editor) \-

> Many harmful provisions still remain in the final chapter, bearing out the
concerns of public health advocates. These include:

Patents for new uses and new methods of using existing products (Article
QQ.E.1.2, p. 17);

A low inventiveness threshold potentially preventing countries from tightening
the criteria for granting patents (Footnote 33, p. 17);

Patent term extensions to compensate for delays in granting patents (Article
QQ.E.12, p. 20) and delays in marketing approval (Article QQ.E.14, p. 22);

Data protection for small molecule drugs at least 5 years for new
pharmaceutical products plus 3 years for new indications, formulations or
methods of administration (Article QQ.E.16, p. 23-24);

Patent linkage provisions likely to result in delays in marketing approval for
generic drugs (Article QQ.E.17); and

Market exclusivity for biologics, provided through one of two options: at
least 8 years of data protection, or at least 5 years of data protection and
other measures to deliver a comparable outcome in the market (Article QQ.E.20,
p. 25-26).

This is the first time a provision for market exclusivity for biologic
products has ever appeared in a trade agreement and this is a new obligation
for many TPP countries.

The outcome of this suite of obligations will be delayed competition from
follow-on generics and biosimilars which means delayed access to affordable
medicines, placing them out of reach altogether for many people in developing
countries. Even countries like Australia, the TPP obligations will lock in
current intellectual property standards, making it difficult or impossible to
reform our system to improve access to affordable medicines in future

If the TPP countries ratify the deal, Big Pharma will have succeeded in
cementing intellectual property standards that will stymie access to medicines
for up to 800 million people in the short term, and more if additional
countries sign up in future. Furthermore, the TPPs intellectual property
chapter sets a new norm that is likely to become the template for future trade
agreements: its implications are global as well as regional.

The governments of TPP countries have been complicit in a global health
disaster of unimaginable proportions a deal that will prevent untold numbers
of people from obtaining medicines that those in many developed countries take
for granted

The Australian Governments brief about the TPP outcomes for biologics says:

In the TPP, Australia has negotiated protections that are consistent with
Australian law and practice. Australia is not required to change any part of
its current law, including data protection for biologics, or our patent
regime. There will be no adverse impact on the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
and no price increase for medicines. But the final text of the TPPs IP chapter
contains some problematic language and troubling ambiguities.

Article QQ.E.20.1 (p. 25-26) outlines two options that countries can implement
to protect new biologics:

1) At least 8 years protection of clinical trial data (QQ.E.20.1(a)); or

2) At least 5 years protection of clinical trial data along with other
measures to provide effective market protection and deliver a comparable
outcome in the market.

Whatever the understanding reached between parties in the negotiating room,
according to the agreed legal text, it appears that the TPP parties are
obliged to ensure the same market exclusivity outcomes regardless of which
option they choose.

The legal language provides room for the United States to continue to pressure
the other TPP countries to ensure that they keep biosimilars (more affordable
follow-on products) off the market for eight years, in order to provide
equivalent effective market protection and a comparable outcome to eight years
of data protection

Conclusions

The provisions relating to biologics are problematic and ambiguous. They
appear to commit countries to providing either eight years of clinical trial
data protection, or five years of clinical trial data protection along with
other measures to deliver comparable outcomes. While the Australian Government
has said that the regime for biologics in Australia will not change, the
language leaves room for continued pressure by the United States to ensure
that TPP countries prevent biosimilars from entering the market for eight
years. The definition of biologics is very broad and likely to limit countries
flexibility in determining the scope of the obligation. A review by the TPP
Commission of both the length and scope of protection after ten years provides
a further mechanism for US pressure to expand and extend monopolies on
expensive biologics.

Germany saw ["The Biggest Protest In
Years"](http://www.zerohedge.com/news/2015-10-10/biggest-protest-country-has-
seen-years-quarter-million-germans-protest-obama-free-tr) over these trade
deals last weekend with quarter million persons attending -

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/AufMYz7Aytw" frameborder="0"> </iframe>


Reuters reported -

[Hundreds of thousands protest in Berlin against EU-U.S. trade
deal](http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/10/10/us-trade-germany-ttip-
protests-idUSKCN0S40L720151010)

![Consumer rights activists take part in a march to protest against TTIP in
Berlin](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/download-
300x205.jpg)

