---
title: Talks and Posters at the Genome Informatics Conference
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
This poorly arranged conference by CSHL requires you to pay to even see the
abstracts. Talk about rise of sharing and open-access in science !! Most talks
are uninteresting and the political connection (read NHGRI) appears to be the
selection criterion rather than quality of science. A number of good
scientists I know are dropping out of CSHL-arranged conferences.
<!--more-->

**talks**

Aboukhalil, R. - GinkgoInteractive analysis and quality assessment of single-
cell CNV data

BAE, S. - A genetic analysis of a complex trait in a genetically intractable
gut microbe

Breitwieser, F.P. - A novel software tool and pipeline for the classification
of meta-genomics sequencing data, and their application to the diagnosis of
neuropathological infections of the nervous system

Chiang, C. - Detection and interpretation of genome structural variation in
GTEx samples

Chin, J. - Diploid genome assembly and comprehensive haplotype sequence
reconstruction

Church, D.M. - The Rumsfeldian challenges of developing clinical sequencing
tests

Cooke, D. - Haplotype-based somatic mutation calling in heterogeneous cancer
samples

Dabdoub, S. - Computational analysis of disease-associated functional shifts
in the periodontal microbiome

Vera, D. - Differential nuclease sensitivity profiling of human chromatin
reveals cell-type specific nucleosome positions, nucleosome sensitivity, open
chromatin, and transcription factor binding

De, S. - SASE-hunterA computational method to detect signatures of accelerated
somatic evolution in non-coding regions of cancer genomes

Fang, H. - Scikit-riboAccurate A-site prediction and robust modeling of
translation control from Riboseq and RNAseq data

Friedberg, I. - A large scale prediction of bacteriocin gene blocks suggests a
wide functional spectrum for bacteriocins

Gymrek, M.A. - Characterization of the microsatellite mutation process at
every locus in the genome

Lunter, G. - Basecalling from raw Oxford Nanopore data

Luo, Z. - Genome-wide copy number variation analysis for Plasmodium vivax
global isolates

McLysaght, A. - Dosage sensitive genes in evolution and disease

Melsted, P. - KallistoNear-optimal RNA-Seq quantification

Meltz Steinberg, K.N. - Identifying low frequency and rare coding variation
influencing cardiometabolic traits through whole exome sequencing of 20,000
FinnsThe FinMetSeq Study

Miller, C. - Assessing tumor heterogeneity and tracking clonal clearance in
response to therapy

Nattestad, M. - Comprehensive genome and transcriptome structural analysis of
a breast cancer cell line using PacBio long read sequencing

Nellore, A. - An analysis of splicing variation across the sequence read
archive with Rail-RNA

Neretti, N. - Reorganization of chromosome architecture in cellular senescence

Ning, Z. - Genome scaffolding and structural variation detection from MinION
Nanopore sequencing data

Oguz, C. - Predictive modeling of coronary artery calcification using decision
trees

Park, Y. - Using Mendelian randomization to investigate association between
gene expression variation and complex traits

Pembroke, W.G. - Temporal transcriptomics reveals dysregulation of twin-
peaking genes which reset the clock in a mouse model of psychiatric disease

Phillippy, A. - How to compare and cluster every known genome in about an hour

Quinlan, A.R. - Why is querying the genome so difficult?

Rabani, M. - Unbiased discovery of cis-regulatory elements that determine mRNA
post-transcriptional regulation during early development

Ribeiro, D. - Comparative genomics over 50 newly-sequenced species of
parasitic worms

Rubanova, Y. - Using a bump hunting approach for genome-wide identification of
novel imprinted genes

Siepel, A.C. - Genome-wide inference of natural selection on regulatory
sequences in the human genome

Singer, M. - Identifying novel drivers of CD8 T cell exhaustion in tumor

Siska, C.J. - Evaluating the application of sequencing data to differential
coexpression using the discordant method

Stokowy, T. - RareVariantVisA new tool for identification of causative
variants in rare monogenic disorders from whole genome sequencing data

TANG, Y. - Hidden RNA codes revealed from the plant in vivo RNA structurome

Trapnell, C. - Differential analysis of bifurcating single-cell gene
expression trajectories

Hartley, S.W. - JunctionSeqDetecting differential splice junction usage via
RNA-Seq

Hide, W.A. - PCxN, the pathway co-activity mapA new approach for the
unification of functional biology

Hoffman, M. - Modeling methyl-sensitive transcription factor motifs with an
expanded epigenetic alphabet

Itan, Y. - Discovery of genetic heterogeneity in a context of physiological
homogeneity by biological distance clustering

Kelley, D.R. - Basset: Learning the regulatory code of the accessible genome
with deep convolutional neural networks

Kim, D. - HISAT2Graph-based alignment of next-generation sequencing reads to a
population of human genomes

Li, Q. - Improved methods for NGS-based conotoxin discovery

Jex, A.R. - Genomic assembly and analysis of highly heterzygotic polyploidal
parasitic protists

**posters**

Abyzov, A. - Comprehensive profiling of somatic mosaicism in human brain

Ahn, J.

Decoupling array CGH sample-reference hybridization pairs for normalization of
log ratio artefacts.

poster

Alzbutas, G.

5-hydroxymethylcytosine in Daphnia pulex

poster

Amar, D.

Integrated analysis of numerous heterogeneous gene expression profiles for
detecting robust disease-specific biomarkers and proposing drug targets

poster

Arce, J.

Optimization of de novo transcriptome assembly and differential expression
analysis of salt tolerance genes in the halophyte Suaeda fruticosa

poster

Aswad, L.

Molecular delineation of two major oncogenic pathways governing invasive
ductal breast cancer development

poster

Balasubramanian, G.

Detection of pathogen integration sites in cancer

poster

Ballouz, S.

AuPairWiseBiologically focused RNA-seq quality control using co-expression

poster

Bao, R.

Integrated genomic analysis suggests inherited predisposition to cancer in
therapy-related acute lymphoblastic leukemia (tr-ALL)

poster

Blankenberg, D.

From the ground to the cloud in just minutesBuilding a customized Galaxy
analysis server using only a web browser

poster

Bowman, M.

A modified MAKER structural genome annotation method reveals novel gene
predictions of high and low GC content in rice

poster

Brumm, R.

A software tool for data integration in a diagnostic laboratory

poster

Cain, S.

GMOD in the Cloud 2.0

poster

Cech, M.

Galaxy Tool World ProgressionHappier developers, happier users

poster

Chen, J.

slnckyA software and novel approach for annotation and evolutionary analysis
of LncRNAs

poster

Chen, T.

PickArmSite, investigate the preference of using one arm for miRNAs

poster

Chen, Z.

Abundant Inverted Duplicates in the Human and Mouse Genomes as Functional
Regulatory elements evolving under sex-related selection

poster

Chilton, J.M.

Building more expressive Galaxy workflows

poster

Chougule, K.M.

Assessing new tools and best practices for RNA seq data analysis and
visualization with iPlant cyberinfrastructure

poster

Cremer, C.

Deconvolving gene expression profiles for tumor populations with prior
frequency information

poster

Criscione, S.W.

Comparison of chromosome structure across conditions using a three dimensional
chromosome browser

poster

Dale, R.

Wrangling data into track hub visualizations with hubward

poster

Das Roy, R.

Identification of differentially expressed genes of developing mouse tooth
within their genomic locations

poster

Dashnow, H.H.

Comparing algorithms to genotype short tandem repeats in next-generation
sequencing data

poster

Davila, J.

The impact of RNA degradation on the ability to detect fusions using TruSeq
RNA library Preparation

poster

Davis, A.R.

Additional variants among the MH-GRID cohort discovered after alignment to an
ancestry specific reference genome

poster

Derr, A.

ESATA new tool for analyzing end-sequencing RNA-Seq data

poster

Deshwar, A.G.

Reconstructing the evolutionary history of tumours

poster

Dobin, A.

Precision-STARUnbiased allele aware mapping of RNA-seq reads to personal
genomes

poster

Dunn, N.A.

ApolloA platform for collaborative genome curation and analysis

poster

Ence, D.D.

Assembly-free comparative genomics of Trichomonas vaginalis and three other
trichomonads

poster

Eng, S.W.

Biologically based disease classification for childhood arthritis

poster

Escaliere, B.

TuneSimTunable variant set Simulator for NGS reads

poster

Foltz, S.M.

Genomic region and sample selection strategy for variant discovery and
association analysis

poster

Freeberg, M.

Transcriptome states identified by probabilistic modeling of CLIP-seq datasets
in yeast

poster

Frieden, A.

Orthogonal sequencing of the human exome

poster

Garcia, G.

K-mer spectra filters to assemble high quality, contiguous, collapsed mosaics
from non-model heterozygous genomes

poster

Gazzo, A.M.

DIDAA first digenic diseases database

poster

Gingeras, T.

PIPESA tool for classifying long RNA reads

poster

Girgis, H.Z.

RedAn intelligent, rapid, accurate tool for detecting repeats de-novo on the
genomic scale

poster

Goldfarb, T.

RefSeq annotation of functional elements on the human and mouse reference
genomes

poster

Goldstein, L.D.

Structural alteration of transcript isoforms in human cancers

poster

Gonnella, G.

MeTavGenA Taverna-based pipeline for the analysis of shotgun metagenomic data

poster

Gorthi, A.

Characterization of DNA damage response and R-loops in Ewing sarcoma

poster

Gouin, A.

Improvement of the assembly of heterozygous genomes of non-model organisms

poster

Grabowska, E.

Concordance and contamination checker for WGS and WES matched sample studies

poster

Greene, C.S.

ADAGEA method for the unsupervised integration of gene expression experiments
applied to Pseudomonas aeruginosa

poster

Gurtowski, J.

The genome and transcriptome of the regeneration-competent flatworm,
Macrostomum lignano

poster

Ha, K.

Systematic analysis of alternative polyadenylation during neurogenesis of
murine embryonic stem cells

poster

Habegger, L.

CLAMMSA scalable pipeline for CNV calling and quality control, applied to over
40,000 exomes

poster

Hackl, T.

proovread-3.0PacBio hybrid error correction for di-/polyploid genomes,
metagenomes and transcriptomes

poster

Hansen, N.F.

Utilization of very large read depth sequencing data for the detection of
variation in a father-mother-son trio

poster

Hao, Y.

TEpeaksA tool for including repetitive sequences in ChIP-seq and Clip-seq
analyses

poster

Harris, J.

CNVThresherCombining multiple lines of evidence to construct high-quality CNV
call sets

poster

Hause, R.J.

The landscape of microsatellite instability in cancer exomes

poster

Hauser, F.E.

On the relativity of time and space of tumorsClinical segmentation is the key
to eradicate breast cancer

poster

Havrilla, J.

Using the landscape of genetic variation in protein domains to improve
functional consequence predictions

poster

He, M.

EncoreA comprehensive framework for cancer sequencing analysis

poster

HEBRARD, M.

MetaTreeMapVisual representation of taxonomic assignment

poster

Helaers, R.

HighlanderVariant filtering made easier

poster

Hicks, S.C.

On the widespread and critical impact of batch effects and systematic bias in
single-cell RNA-Seq data

poster

Hitz, B.

The ENCODE Uniform Analysis Pipelines

Case studies in cloud-based data analysis and distribution

poster

Hong, C.

Integrated approach to identify clinically relevant CNVs in ClinSeq? cohort

poster

Hwang, B.

De novo assembly and next-generation sequencing to analyze full-length gene
variants from codon-barcoded libraries

poster

Itan, Y.

The human gene damage indexA novel gene-level approach to prioritize exome
variations

poster

Itan, Y.

The mutation significance cutoff (MSC)A gene-specific approach to predicting
the impact of human gene variants

poster

Jacques, P.

Large scale correlation of epigenomics data

poster

Jaffe, A.E.

Interrogating the mechanisms of schizophrenia genetic risk in the fully
characterized human brain transcriptome

poster

Jaiswal, P.

Plant ReactomeA reference resource for analyzing plant metabolic and
regulatory pathways

poster

Jin, Y.

BAMQCA quality control tool for mapped next generation sequencing datasets

poster

Jongeneel, V.

Benchmarking ultrafast workflows for human genome variant calling

poster

Joshi, J.

Utilization of high-throughput sequencing to detect candidate genes associated
with mouse reproductive longevity

poster

Kadarmideen, H.N.

Construction of transcription factor networks for obesity using RNAseq
transcriptomics

poster

Kadarmideen, H.N.

Genetic network method based analysis of antidepressant treatment

poster

Kahles, A.

Building a meta-metagenome graph

poster

Karro, J.E.

A dynamic programming approach to the reconstruction of prokaryote gene block
evolution history

poster

Khan, H.

Chop-StitchTargeted assembly of genes using transcriptome assembly and Bloom
filter-based de Bruijn graphs

poster

Khan, M.M.

Role of lincRNA in T helper cell differentiation

poster

Kim, H.

Comprehensive, flexible pipelines for alternative polyadenylation analysis

poster

Kim, J.

Identification and filtration of false somatic variants caused by vector
contamination

poster

Kim, S.

Genomic-based 16S ribosomal RNA database web server and tools

poster

Kitts, P.

Improving accessibility and usability of genome data at NCBI

poster

Knnight, J.

JBAM quality score compression

poster

Koren, S.

CanuA new single-molecule sequence assembler for genomes large and small

poster

Kozaki, T.

Phylogeny of the spider mite sub-family Tetranychinae (Acari: Tetranychidae)
from Japan reconstructed by their transcriptomes

poster

Krishnan, A.

Bringing genomic data into focus for studying complex diseases in specific
biological contexts

poster

Kucuk, M.

KollectorTranscript-guided targeted assembly of genes

poster

Kucukural, A.

DolphinLarge-scale sequencing analysis platform

poster

Kumar, N.

Multimedia annotation using the iCLiKVAL browser extension

poster

Kumar, V.

The DOE Systems Biology KnowledgebaseA system for collaborative and
reproducible inference and modeling of biological function

poster

Lage, K.

A comparative analysis of network mutation burdens across 21 tumor types
predicts new candidate cancer genes in the tail of the mutation distribution
of existing cancer genomes

poster

Lage, K.

Large-scale prediction of pathways from GWAS and exome-sequencing projects by
a systematic analysis of differential pathway architectures in diverse
functional genomic networks

poster

Lamichhaney, S.

Identification of the genetic basis underlying alternative reproductive
strategies in the ruff (Philomachus pugnax)

poster

Lee, H.

The resurgence of reference quality genome

poster

Lee, Y.

Unified framework for genome-wide characterization of human diseases

poster

Legault, M.

ForwardA bioinformatics tool to manage, execute and explore phenomic studies

poster

Lemieux Perreault, L.

genipe A Python module to perform genome-wide imputation analysis

poster

Lenz, F.

FastqDemultiplexA flexible demultiplexing tool for Illumina reads

poster

Liang, S.

Speeding up long-read assembly by reducing alignments overlap due to repeats

poster

Lim, E.

PoseidonA highly sensitive and efficient taxonomy classifier

poster

Liyakat Ali, T.

Transcriptome and epigenome profiling of human olfactory mucosa stem cells as
a model system for autism spectrum disorders

poster

Low, L.E.

GenomsawitA one-stop genome information portal for oil palm

poster

Macleon, S.

Determining the hypoxic gene expression response of S. cerevisiae cells using
RNA-seq and statistical analysis of time-course data

poster

MADOUI, A.

Microbial genome assembly using synthetic error-free reads

poster

Meynert, A.M.

Targeted sequencing of FFPE ovarian cancer tumour samples on the Ion PGM
platform

poster

Molik, D.

Automated transfer of workflows from Galaxy to Yabi and command line tools

poster

Mulvaney, J.D.

Searching and exploring Gramenes comparative genomics datasets on the web

poster

Nakato, R.

Comparative analysis of chromatin states and gene expression profiles for
various endothelium cells

poster

Nevedomskaya, E.

Probing transcriptional regulation in tumor specimens yields hallmarks of
prostate cancer outcome

poster

Nie, K.

Computational analysis of target specificity of double-stranded RNA binding
protein Staufen

poster

Okagaki-Vraspir, L.H.

Comparative genome analysis of members of the Magnaporthaceae family of fungi

poster

Olson, A.

Integrated web services supporting search and interactive analysis tools at
Gramene

poster

Park, M.

The identification of the gene expression signatures of tissue-specific
effects of pioglitazone treatments in a murine model of type 2 diabetes

poster

Paropkari, A.

Effects of hormonal changes and cigarette smoking on oral microbiome

poster

Pedersen, B.S.

Enhancing the utility and usability of gemini for rare and common disease
research

poster

Pertea, M.

Accurate and efficient transcript identification and quantification using RNA-
Seq data

poster

Phan, L.

NCBIs Genetic Variation Resources

poster

Piccolo, S.R.

Mixture models that estimate gene-expression activation on a single-sample
basis for any expression platform

poster

Pimentel, H.

Transcript differential analysis of RNA-Seq data with sleuth

poster

Pinello, L.

Genome-wide characterization of chromatin state plasticity

poster

Postma, A.V.

New genetic approaches in patients with transposition of the great arteries

poster

Prasad, M.

An automated data management system for hereditary cancer analysis in clinical
diagnostics

poster

Pritt, M.J.

BoilerA compression tool for BAM files supporting fast, accurate queries

poster

Pruitt, K.

Annotating, maintaining, and curating RefSeq prokaryotic genomes

poster

Pulman, J.A.

Variation in tissue-specific codon usage across four members of the Poaceae

poster

Qi, R.

Using ERCC spike-ins and erccdashboard R package to assess performance of
differential gene expression detection by Ion AmpliSeqTM Transcriptome assays

poster

Ramani, A.K.

The role of alternative splicing and gene expression in diffuse intrinsic
pontine gliomas

poster

Rasmussen, S.H.

microRNA target sites act as regulatory hotspots in 3UTRs

poster

Ratan, A.

Accurate prediction of breakpoints in sequences

poster

Razaviyayn, M.

Iso-Seq bioinformatics analysis with PacBio long reads

poster

Rescheneder, P.

Highly accurate read mapping of third generation sequencing reads for improved
structural variation analysis

poster

Rowicka, M.

Clarify and quantifying mechanisms of DSB formation using mathematical
modelling and BLESS sequencing

poster

Saunders, G.

Normalizing variation between open-access variation datasets

poster

Sauria, M.

The Galaxy HiC browserAn interactive multi-dimensional genome topology browser
and data repository

poster

Schlaffner, C.

Quantitative proteogenomics application to personalised proteomics

poster

Schneider, V.A.

Updating approaches to reference assembly curation

poster

Schones, D.E.

Regulatory variation in mice with diverse responses to environmental stimuli
is driven by transposable element variation and environmentally induced
chromatin remodeling at tissue specific transcription factor binding sites

poster

Sedlazeck, F.J.

Detection of structural variants using third generation sequencing

poster

Sen, S.K.

Reference-masked RNA-Seq assembly in human tissues relevant for cardiovascular
disease and Type 2 diabetes reveals unannotated transcripts at the chr9p21
GWAS candidate locus

poster

Sheth, P.

Optimizations of physical genome map contiguity by in silico ligation

poster

Silverstein, K.A.

Highly dynamic expansions of antimicrobial loci among Medicago truncatula
accessions are revealed by inclusion of SMRT sequencing

poster

Singh, A.P.

Duplex sequencing for low allele frequency detection

poster

Smith, K.S.

SomVarIUSSomatic variant identification from unpaired tissue samples

poster

Stein, J.C.

GrameneComparative plant genomics and pathway resources

poster

Sung, M.-H.

Profiling protein occupants of the genomeIs TF footprinting ready for prime
time?

poster

Tanaka, H.

De novo mutations induced by multiple DNA double strand breaks are revealed by
whole-genome sequencing of Arabidopsis thaliana

poster

Taylor, T.D.

Increasing discoverability and connectivity of scientific media through
annotation with iCLiKVAL

poster

Teer, J.K.

Exploring database options for storage of diverse DNA sequence variation
datasets

poster

Teo, Y.

A comparative study of metagenomic analysis pipelines for accurate
quantification of relative species abundance

poster

Turaga, N.

Galaxy Methylation Toolkit as a galaxy flavor

poster

Turner-Maier, J.P.

200 MammalsSequence conservation at the single basepair level

poster

Ullah, U.

Identification of global regulators of T-helper cell lineages specification

poster

Vacca, A.

An integrated analysis of the transcriptional response of human monocyte-
derived macrophages to LPS

poster

Vejnar, C.E.

CRISPRscanDesigning highly efficient sgRNAs for CRISPR-Cas9 targeting in vivo

poster

Verleyen, W.

SAPLINGA tool for customized network analysis focusing on psychiatric genetics

poster

Wang, B.

Unveiling the complexity of maize B73 transcriptome by single molecule long
read sequencing

poster

Wang, L.

Building a distributed system for sequence analysis

poster

Wang, Y.

Rapid, dynamic, and interactive visualization framework for pathogen
identification in complex respiratory specimens from unexplained respiratory
disease outbreak responses

poster

Weber, M.

A novel approach to determining null models and controls for co-expression
networks

poster

Williams-DeVane, C.R.

Decision tree-based method for integrating multi-domain data to identify
childhood obesity disease endotypes

poster

Wintersinger, J.A.

Scaling cancer subpopulation phylogeny reconstruction to thousands of tumors

poster

Wong, L.

Genetic insights into juvenile idiopathic arthritis derived from deep whole
genome sequencing

poster

Wood, D.E.

Kraken 2Faster and more sensitive metagenomic classification

poster

Yang, C.

NanoSimNanopore sequencing read simulator based on statistical
characterization

poster

Ye, K.

Cloud-based variant discovery using GenomeVIP

poster

Ye, P.

The role of PIWI-interacting RNAs in LINE-1 evolutionary dynamics

poster

Zhong, Y.

Probabilistic model for detecting mRNA translation efficiency changes from
ribosome profiling

poster

