---
title: Phage Therapy - Reviews
categories:
- chem
---
1\.
<!--more-->

2010 -

[Phage Therapy in Clinical Practice: Treatment of Human Infections - Kutter et
al.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20214609)

**"The Republic of Georgia is the one place in the world where phage therapy is a component of standard 

medical practice, routinely used in a number of hospitals and clinics for both
prophylactic and treatment purposes. Much of the phage availability both
presently and historically has been associated with the Eliava Institute."**

> Abstract: Phage therapy is the application of bacteria-specific viruses with
the goal of reducing or eliminating pathogenic or nuisance bacteria. While
phage therapy has become a broadly relevant technology, including veterinary,
agricultural, and food microbiology applications, it is for the treatment or
prevention of human infections that phage therapy first caught the world's
imagination see, especially, Arrowsmith by Sinclair Lewis (1925) and which
today is the primary motivator of the field. Nonetheless, though the first
human phage therapy took place in the 1920s, by the 1940s the field, was in
steep decline despite early promise. The causes were at least three-fold:
insufficient understanding among researchers of basic phage biology; over
exuberance, which led, along with ignorance, to carelessness; and the advent
of antibiotics, an easier to handle as well as highly powerful category of
antibacterials. The decline in phage therapy was neither uniform nor complete,
especially in the former Soviet Republic of Georgia, where phage therapy
traditions and practice continue to this day. In this review we strive toward
three goals: 1. To provide an overview of the potential of phage therapy as a
means of treating or preventing human diseases; 2. To explore the phage
therapy state of the art as currently practiced by physicians in various
pockets of phage therapy activity around the world, including in terms of
potential commercialization; and 3. To avert a recapitulation of phage
therapy's early decline by outlining good practices in phage therapy practice,
experimentation, and, ultimately, commercialization.

\---------------------------

2\. 2011 review -

[Pros and cons of phage
therapy](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3278648/)

Catherine Loc-Carrilloand Stephen T. Abedon

> **Potential Disadvantages**

Concerns about using phages as antibacterial agents can be distinguished into
four categories: (1) phage selection, (2) phage host-range limitations, (3)
the uniqueness of phages as pharmaceuticals, and (4) unfamiliarity with
phages. See references 4 and 5 for additional discussion.

**Not all phages make for good therapeutics.**

Good therapeutic phages should have a high potential to reach and then kill
bacteria in combination with a low potential to otherwise negatively modify
the environments to which they are applied. These characteristics can be
reasonably assured so long as phages are obligately lytic, stable under
typical storage conditions and temperatures, subject to appropriate efficacy
and safety studies, and, ideally, fully sequenced to confirm the absence of
undesirable genes such as toxins.10,18 Note that a phage that is obligately
lytic we define as not temperate and released from infected cells via lysis,
that is, unable to display lysogeny and not released chronically. The use of
temperate phages as therapeutics is problematic due to a combination of
display of superinfection immunity,13 which converts phage-sensitive bacteria
into insensitive ones, and the encoding of bacterial virulence factors,
including bacterial toxins.810,18,27,29

In addition to avoiding temperate or toxin-carrying phages, the aim of phage
characterization is to exclude as therapeutics those phages that display poor
killing potential against target bacteria. Such low virulence can be due to
poor adsorption properties, low potential to evade bacterial defenses, or poor
replication characteristics.3 Also less desirable for therapeutics are those
phages that display poor pharmacokinetics, that is, poor absorption,
distribution, and survival in situ.3 Ideally phages should also display a low
potential to transfer bacterial genes between bacteria (transduction).10,18

Phage characterization additionally can include virion morphology (via
electron microscopy), protein profiles, or genotype characterization other
than via full-genome sequencing (e.g., PFGE profiles of restriction digested
genomes), etc.,18 though the costs associated with exhaustive phage
characterization prior to phage use can be prohibitive. The general aim,
therefore, should be to identify those phages that display good primary
pharmacodynamics (that is, antibacterial virulence), minimal secondary
pharmacodynamics (low potential to do harm to patients), and good
pharmacokinetics (an ability to reach target bacteria in situ).3 Phages that
do not adequately meet these criteria should in most circumstances not be
employed as therapeutics. Minimally this should entail avoiding temperate
phages and, ideally, full genome sequencing should be used to rule out
virulence-factor carriage.

**The problem of narrow host range.**

No antimicrobials displaying selective toxicity will affect all possible
microbial targets. Typically the narrowness of phage host rangesa few strains,
a few species, or much rarer, a few genera of bacteria13will at a minimum
place limitations on presumptive treatment, i.e., treatment courses that begin
prior to the identification of the pathogen's susceptibility to antibacterials
such as to specific phages. However, as phages can often be employed in
combination with other antibacterial agents, including other phages (so-called
phage cocktails), the lytic spectrum of phage products can be much broader
than the spectrum of activity of individual phage types.4,9,20 Even broadly
acting phage cocktails are normally more selective in their spectrum of
activity than typical narrow-spectrum antibiotics, a property that can be
viewed as an additional advantage of phage therapy.

**Phages are not unique pharmaceuticals**

Phages as pharmaceuticals are protein-based, live-biological agents that can
potentially interact with the body's immune system, can actively replicate,
and can even evolve during manufacture or use, but are far from unique in
these regards. For example, many protein-based pharmaceuticals can stimulate
immune systems, antibiotics that lyse bacteria will release bacterial toxins
in situ, and live-attenuated vaccines both actively replicate and evolve
including within the context of infecting body tissues. Protein-based drugs,
chemical antibiotics, and whole vaccines have previously been approved for use
despite these various properties. It therefore stands to reason that phage-
based pharmaceuticals should not be disqualified for possessing similar
attributes.

**but nonetheless are unusual.**

The Western medical establishment's unfamiliarity with phages, as
antibacterial agents, may be phage therapy's greatest challenge. However, as
noted, the various phage oddities as drugs at least are not unique to them.
Indeed, a few phage products have now passed regulatory standards, having been
classified by the FDA as GRAS (Generally Regarded As Safe), registered by the
EPA, or approved for use by the USDA.9,26 Nevertheless, phages as viruses
could be misinterpreted by the general public as being in some manner
equivalent to viral pathogens that cause human disease. So far, however,
public resistance has not materialized, and it is perhaps fortunate that
bacterial viruses are known, instead, as phages.

\---------------------------

3\. 2012 review in Iranian journal -

[Bacteriophage: Time to Re-Evaluate the Potential of Phage Therapy as a
Promising Agent to Control Multidrug-Resistant
Bacteria](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23494063)

Masoud Sabouri Ghannad, Avid Mohammadi

> Nowadays the most difficult problem in treatment of bacterial infections is
the appearance of resistant bacteria to the antimicrobial agents so that the
attention is being drawn to other potential targets. In view of the positive
findings of phage therapy, many advantages have been mentioned which utilizes
phage therapy over chemotherapy and it seems to be a promising agent to
replace the antibiotics. This review focuses on an understanding of phages for
the treatment of bacterial infectious diseases as a new alternative treatment
of infections caused by multiple antibiotic resistant bacteria. Therefore,
utilizing bacteriophage may be accounted as an alternative therapy. It is
appropriate time to re-evaluate the potential of phage therapy as an effective
bactericidal and a promising agent to control multidrug-resistant bacteria.

\---------------------------

4\.

[Learning from Bacteriophages - Advantages and Limitations of Phage and Phage-
Encoded Protein
Applications](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3594737/)

> The emergence of bacteria resistance to most of the currently available
antibiotics has become a critical therapeutic problem. The bacteria causing
both hospital and community-acquired infections are most often multidrug
resistant. In view of the alarming level of antibiotic resistance between
bacterial species and difficulties with treatment, alternative or supportive
antibacterial cure has to be developed. The presented review focuses on the
major characteristics of bacteriophages and phage-encoded proteins affecting
their usefulness as antimicrobial agents. We discuss several issues such as
mode of action, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, resistance and
manufacturing aspects of bacteriophages and phage-encoded proteins
application.

1.?INTRODUCTION

The idea of using bacteriophages to treat infections has been well known since
bacterial viruses were discovered by Frederick Twort [1] and Felix dHrelle [2]
at the beginning of the 20th century. A few years later, Alexander Fleming
revealed an antibacterial activity of Penicillium notatum mould and the
antibiotics era was began. A large-scale introduction and success of
antibiotics resulted in decreased interest in phage research/applications as a
potential antimicrobial tool for controlling bacterial infections. At that
time, the broad application of antibiotics resulted in an extensive bacterial
resistance to these drugs, which shows that alternative methods are needed for
eradication of pathogens. A renaissance of research on the biology of lytic
bacteriophages appears to be a promising approach as a treatment for bacterial
infections, especially those caused by multidrug resistant. A phage cocktail
has been commonly applied as alternative or as supportive treatment
simultaneously with antibiotics, particularly in Eastern Europe. For many
years experiments were conducted only on a small scale in several centers,
including Wroclaw and Georgia [3-11]. The most detailed historical
publications documenting phage therapy come from Polish work done in Hirszfeld
Institute by Stefan Slopek's group [12-14]. Positive results were indicated by
the eradication of Escherichia, Pseudomonas, Proteus, Klebsiella and
Staphylococcus clinical strains of various infections among both humans and
animal models [12, 13, 15-17]. Nowadays, phages have been proposed as natural
antimicrobial agents to fight bacterial infections in humans, inanimals or in
crops of agricultural importance. Moreover, phage encoded proteins such as
endolysins, exopolysaccharidases, and holins proved their ability as a
promising alternative antibacterial products [18-21]. In this review, we
concentrate on both advantages and limitations of antibiotics, bacteriophages
and phage proteins as useful tools for bacteria eradication.

\-------------------------------

5\.

2001 review -

[Bacteriophage Therapy - ALEXANDER SULAKVELIDZE, ZEMPHIRA ALAVIDZE AND J.
GLENN MORRIS, JR](http://aac.asm.org/content/45/3/649)

\-------------------------------

6\.

2012 review -

[Phage therapyconstraints and possibilities](http://informahealthcare.com/doi/
full/10.3109/03009734.2014.902878)

> The rise of antibiotic-resistant bacterial strains, causing intractable
infections, has resulted in an increased interest in phage therapy. Phage
therapy preceded antibiotic treatment against bacterial infections and
involves the use of bacteriophages, bacterial viruses, to fight bacteria.
Virulent phages are abundant and have proven to be very effective in vitro,
where they in most cases lyse any bacteria within the hour. Clinical trials on
animals and humans show promising results but also that the treatments are not
completely effective. This is partly due to the studies being carried out with
few phages, and with limited experimental groups, but also the fact that phage
therapy has limitations in vivo. Phages are large compared with small
antibiotic molecules, and each phage can only infect one or a few bacterial
strains. A very large number of different phages are needed to treat
infections as these are caused by genetically different strains of bacteria.
Phages are effective only if enough of them can reach the bacteria and
increase in number in situ. Taken together, this entails high demands on
resources for the construction of phage libraries and the testing of
individual phages. The effectiveness and host range must be characterized, and
immunological risks must be assessed for every single phage.

popular magazines -

[Bacteriophage Boom?](http://www.the-
scientist.com/?articles.view/articleNo/41097/title/Bacteriophage-Boom-/)

[Phage therapy gets revitalized](http://www.nature.com/news/phage-therapy-
gets-revitalized-1.15348)

