---
title: A Mouse Geneticist&rsquo;s Practical Guide to CRISPR Applications
categories:
- chem
---
[Link](http://www.genetics.org/content/199/1/1.full)
<!--more-->

> CRISPR/Cas9 system of RNA-guided genome editing is revolutionizing genetics
research in a wide spectrum of organisms. Even for the laboratory mouse, a
model that has thrived under the benefits of embryonic stem (ES) cell knockout
capabilities for nearly three decades, CRISPR (Clustered Regularly Interspaced
Short Palindromic Repeats)/Cas9 technology enables one to manipulate the
genome with unprecedented simplicity and speed. It allows generation of null,
conditional, precisely mutated, reporter, or tagged alleles in mice. Moreover,
it holds promise for other applications beyond genome editing. The crux of
this system is the efficient and targeted introduction of DNA breaks that are
repaired by any of several pathways in a predictable but not entirely
controllable manner. Thus, further optimizations and improvements are being
developed. Here, we summarize current applications and provide a practical
guide to use the CRISPR/Cas9 system for mouse mutagenesis, based on published
reports and our own experiences. We discuss critical points and suggest
technical improvements to increase efficiency of RNA-guided genome editing in
mouse embryos and address practical problems such as mosaicism in founders,
which complicates genotyping and phenotyping. We describe a next-generation
sequencing strategy for simultaneous characterization of on- and off-target
editing in mice derived from multiple CRISPR experiments. Additionally, we
report evidence that elevated frequency of precise, homology-directed editing
can be achieved by transient inhibition of the Ligase IV-dependent
nonhomologous end-joining pathway in one-celled mouse embryos.

