---
title: Central Planner Ron Germain Reinvents Round Wheel
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Last few years have seen a parade of fools coming up with various central
planning ideas on how to fix the US biomedical funding system. Last year, [we
covered the efforts of](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/04/15/dangerous-
central-planners-coming-to-rescue-us-biomedical-research/) Bruce Alberts, Marc
W. Kirschner, Shirley Tilghman, and Harold Varmus, who are all accomplished
scientists, but clueless central planners (as if there is another category).
The best evidence that they are not worth listening to is that they were among
the leaders of NIH politburo, when the system went downhill. You can do far
better by taking George Bush's suggestions on how to fix Iraq or David
Petraeus' advice on achieving marital bliss.
<!--more-->

![Ronald N. Germain, M.D., Ph.D.](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/06/RonaldGermain.jpg)

Today, it is the turn of [Ron Germain](http://www.niaid.nih.gov/labsandresourc
es/labs/aboutlabs/lsb/pages/germain.aspx), who is the Chief of Laboratory of
Systems Biology and the Chief of Lymphocyte Biology Section at NIH. Germain is
proud to advertise his central planning efforts ('spearheading' :)), as you
can see from [his webpage](http://jem.rupress.org/content/207/2/266.full).

> In 2006, Germain spearheaded a systems immunology program at the National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), which included the
development of software to build and test complex models. More recently he's
helped establish the Center for Human Immunology (CHI) at the NIH, an
interdisciplinary effort with the goal of translating analyses of the human
immune system into therapies for immune-mediated diseases.

[Summary: Germain wasted tons of other people's money on doing things he would
never spend his own money on.]

Yet, what Germain proposes is a tacit acknowledgement that central planning
failed. The core of his proposal is summarized in the following four
sentences.

> Once the new hire is in place, the new faculty member then would have 57
years (this could vary among disciplines) to pursue whatever they wish, with
no need for conventional project specific R01 funding.

[snip]

Several issues arise in terms of the starting junior faculty proposal, first

among them being the source of the funding. I believe that the best mechanism
is to **provide the appointing institution with block grants** that can only
be used for such new faculty support. This is because the institutions make
the appointments, and a national parsing of support would be hard to
coordinate with such hiring decisions in advance.

Essentially Germain proposes a centrally-planned decentralization, where the
ultimate decision-making about junior faculty funding will be done far away
from Kremlin. That is such a radical idea that Germain fails to mention it was
how the universities always funded their research before N** organizations
took control in the 1950s for physics and 1970s for biomedical science. It is
like reinventing round wheel after government legislature mandated using
square wheels for fifty years.

The other failure of Germain is not to see the logical extension of his own
ideas. If central planning failed, as he tacitly acknowledged, then to what
extent did it fail? If decentralization is good at early career level, would
it be good at later career as well? If he did so, he would have come to the
same conclusion as us [copied
below](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/04/15/dangerous-central-planners-
coming-to-rescue-us-biomedical-research/), but he would have also lost his
spearheading job at NIH. It is difficult to get a man to understand something,
when his salary depends on his not understanding it, and Germain is venturing
into dangerous territories.

Our proposal -

> Whenever we criticize the planners, some others ask what we would do to fix
the problem, as if we are dying to be another group of central planning fools.
Yes, we do have a plan too and here it is. US government should shut down all
science funding agencies immediately and make a very public announcement about
it. That will have two salubrious effects

(i) People will have more money in their pockets and they will support science
through other less wasteful channels not involving central planners.

(ii) People will see that the only remaining role of government is to waste
massive amounts of money to fight wars in countries they cannot find in map.
That will hopefully start a clamor for reining in the military, which will
lead to more money in the pockets of people, and thus more money for science
through (i).

\---------------------------------------------------

As I said in 2013 and say again now, the existing biomedical science funding
system needs to be abandoned completely and rebuilt from scratch. Some
thoughts on how to do it are in the following two links.

[US Science Funding Proposal for a Better
Alternative](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/10/14/us-science-funding-
let-us/)

[US Science Funding Proposal for a Better Alternative (Part
II)](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/10/15/alternative-part-ii/)

