---
title: Free draft ebook - Pandora's Toolbox for Bioinformatics
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
I am putting together an e-book to describe the tools in [Pandora's Toolbox
for Bioinformatics](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/01/05/introducing-
pandoras-toolbox-and-pandoras-modules/). It is free. So, feel 'free' to grab a
copy !! Beware - the current version is very far from complete, but once you
get a copy, you will be able to access the improved versions at no extra cost.
<!--more-->

![large](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/large-
225x300.png)

Pandora's Toolbox includes a small subset of mostly recent bioinformatics
programs (BLAST, HMMER, RAPsearch2, BWAMEM, Samtools, KMC2, BCALM, Minia,
SPAdes, SOAPdenovo, SOAPdenovo-trans, Trinity, Sailfish, Tophat, Cufflink,
DALIGNER, HGAP, DBG2OLC, PHYLIP) to help a researcher solve problems in
biology. One overarching goal is to let them get a feel for the algorithms and
not use the programs as black-boxes. Therefore, each chapter describes a
program and includes the following sections - (i) history, (ii) how to run,
(iii) features, (iv) details of algorithm, (v) details of code, (vi) further
readings.

**Status of the genome assembly book**

I had been working extensively [on the genome assembly
book](https://leanpub.com/NGS-assembly), but decided to take a detour from it
to put together [this manual](https://leanpub.com/pandoras-toolbox). That is
because I seemed to be referring to the software programs in Pandora's Toolbox
again and again in the genome assembly book and felt that it would help to get
the topic covered well elsewhere. I plan to spend a week to complete and edit
the sections in this 'Pandora's Toolbox for Bioinformatics' manual and then go
back to the assembly book right after that.

**Readers, please help**

I picked a wide and representative subset of programs in Pandora's Toolbox for
Bioinformatics. Each of the program is reasonably efficient and
algorithmically innovative as well. However, if you think any important
category or program is not covered, please let me know.

