---
title: Fully Funded Bioinformatics PhD Position with a Very Smart Guy
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Our blog covered Eran Elhaik's work on human genetics many times (check [here
](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/04/29/new-method-from-elhaik-can-find-
your-ancestral-village-or-island-of-origin/)and
[here](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/05/08/jewish-race-and/) for
example). He is very talented and creative. If you like to do PhD with him, he
has an open position in UK. This is fully funded for 3.5 years and seems like
a wonderful opportunity.
<!--more-->

Hurry up, because the deadline is Jan 11 !! You can find Eran's email address
[here](http://bioinformatics.group.shef.ac.uk/members/), if you like to
contact him directly.

[Developing novel OMICs tools to identify the origin of ancient bio samples
using ancient
DNA](http://www.findaphd.com/search/ProjectDetails.aspx?PJID=58184)

> What percentage of our DNA came from the Vikings or Ancient Romans? How
migration waves affected the environment? These and other questions can now be
approached using ancient DNA and novel bioinformatics tools. Coupling Ancient
DNA, which is one of the most exciting emerging fields in genetics, with
tools, such as the Geographical Population Structure (GPS), which that can
find ones village of origin using our DNA (http://www.iflscience.com/health-
and-medicine/dna-gps-maps-where-your-ancestors-lived), we can make historical
and evolutionary inferences.

The successful candidate will do some of the work in the ancient DNA lab in
the University of York and in one of the world leading companies in DNA tests,
located in Ohio (USA). The candidate will gain most valuable experience both
in wet lab techniques and bioinformatics.

We are seeking an outstanding graduate students who is self-motivated and can
work independently, with an enthusiasm for a mix of field, lab and computer
based work. Because major parts of the project involve NGS data analyses,
modelling, and programming, we are interested in applicants with strong
mathematical, bio-statistical, and/or computational skills, interested in
paleo-genomics and in developing expertise in bioinformatics, genomics, and
biodiversity while developing ties with a major US DNA diagnostics company.

This is a very multidisciplinary project which provides multiple learning
opportunities in various exciting and emerging fields. We place a strong
emphasis on quantitative, analytical, and computational techniques, such as
genomic modelling, bioinformatics, and a range of OMICs technologies. The
successful candidates will spend about 6 months working in the Ancient DNA lab
in York, learning how to sequence and assemble ancient genomes, and another 3
months in the US training with a DNA diagnosis company.

Funding Notes:

Fully funded for a minimum of 3.5 years, studentships cover: (i) a tax-free
stipend at the standard Research Council rate (at least 13,863 per annum for
2015-2016), (ii) research costs, and (iii) tuition fees at the UK/EU rate.
Studentships are available to UK and EU students who meet the UK residency
requirements. Students from EU countries who do not meet residency
requirements may still be eligible for a fees-only award.

References:

This PhD project is part of the NERC funded Doctoral Training Partnership ACCE
(Adapting to the Challenges of a Changing Environment). This is a partnership
between the Universities of Sheffield, Liverpool, York and the Centre for
Ecology and Hydrology.

Selection process: Shortlisting will take place as soon as possible after the
closing date and successful applicants will be notified promptly. Shortlisted
applicants will be invited for an interview to take place at the University of
Sheffield on w/c 9th February 2015.

