---
title: '"Russian Government is Beheading Scientists in Red Square" - Nature Reports'
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
I am getting tired of Nature 'journal''s ridiculous anti-Russia tirade. Why
not report something like "Russian government is beheading scientists in red
square" or "Russian government serves fresh liver of scientists as food
supplement" to get done with it? Here is a small subset of their eight or more
articles blaming Russia in little over one year.
<!--more-->

In April 2014, Nature reported -

["Western science severs ties with Russia"](http://www.nature.com/news
/western-science-severs-ties-with-russia-1.15008) with the subtitle -
"Countrys science renaissance threatened as NATO and NASA suspend links".
Ohmigosh, Russian astronauts are sobbing profusely due to lack of access to
NASA, one of the most incompetent space agency.

As usual, Nature failed to highlight the truth. NASA does not have any ability
to access the space station without Russian help and is desperate to stay in
the good books of Russians.

[NASA to keep paying Russia to send astronauts to space
station](http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2015/08/05/nasa-keep-
paying-russia-send-astronauts-space-station/31178519/)

> NASA is extending its contract with Russias space agency to transport U.S.
astronauts to the International Space Station for the foreseeable future now
that it appears very unlikely Congress will provide the funding its requesting
to develop a domestic replacement for the mothballed space shuttle, NASA
Administrator Charles F. Bolden Jr. said Wednesday.

Nature did not stop there. In May 2015, the 'journal' wrote -

[Russian scientists cut off from Springer journals](http://www.nature.com/news
/russian-scientists-cut-off-from-springer-journals-1.17584)

> Springer (which completed a merger with Natures publisher this month) and
Russias science minister both say that they are hoping to resolve the problem
soon. But the missed payment and subsequent loss of access is one more example
of how Russias weak economic situation is affecting scientists, who are
already finding it harder to purchase and import overseas equipment, says
Fyodor Kondrashov, a Russian biologist with the Centre for Genomic Regulation
in Barcelona, Spain.

Cut to the chase, this expensive science-reporting rag, which is stuck in an
old-fashioned closed-access business model, is harassing poor scientists for
not being able to access papers written and paid for by scientists from other
countries, because they made the mistake of publishing with Springer/Nature.
Most scientists from all over the world would happily share their papers with
Russians or anyone else irrespective of political difference. Therefore, this
middleman organization named Nature (now part of Springer) damages sharing by
scientists and is proud to announce that on its pages. How sad !

This month, Nature goes overboard and [reports](http://www.nature.com/news
/russian-secret-service-to-vet-research-papers-1.18602) \-

[Russian secret service to vet research papers](http://www.nature.com/news
/russian-secret-service-to-vet-research-papers-1.18602)

Please !! Why not use some of your precious pages on discussing TTIP/TTP, and
related secret deals resulting in - ["Medicines forecast to cost taxpayers
millions more in secret TPP trade deal".](http://www.theguardian.com
/australia-news/2015/feb/23/medicines-forecast-to-cost-taxpayers-millions-
more-in-secret-tpp-trade-deal) Why not mention the war crime of bombing
hospitals by Doctors without Borders ("[US analysts knew bombed Afghan site
was hospital](http://america.aljazeera.com/articles/2015/10/15/us-analysts-
knew-bombed-afghan-site-was-hospital.html)"), an organization vocal in
protesting against secret TTP/TTIP drug deals?

Why does Nature fail to show connections (or lack thereof) between scientific
research and drug prices or fail to discuss war-crime committed against a
group of voluntary doctors, but have no shortage of energy to denigrate
Russia? You may know the answer, but just in case.

After 140 years of wise decision to keep science and politics separate, the
owners of the journal decided otherwise.

> On 30 October 2008, Nature endorsed an American presidential candidate **for
the first time** when it supported Barack Obama during his campaign in
America's 2008 presidential election.

The journal repeated its endorsement in 2012 and has essentially become an
organization captured by the elites.

