---
title: Someone Please Take Titus Brown for a Drink
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
I have been reading a blog post titled - [What I'd tell myself about startups
if I could go back 5 years](http://www.talkingquickly.co.uk/2015/04/what-id-
tell-myself-about-startups/)
<!--more-->

and came across these comments -

> The programming language/ framework wars are great fun in the pub, but of
limited value in real life

A good developer can pick up any language or platform in a few weeks

It is a great list and I encourage you to go through the rest.

\-----------------------------------

Given that academic labs are also like start-ups (at least when the professor
is pre-tenure), I was surprised by reading [this comment from (post-tenure)
Titus Brown](http://ivory.idyll.org/blog/2015-bioinformatics-middle-
class.html) \-

> I disagree strongly with Jared's black & white statement that "this isn't a
language problem" -- part of it absolutely is! Scripting languages enable a
much more flexible and organic interaction with algorithms than languages like
Java and C++, in my extensive personal experience. People can also pick up
scripting languages much more easily than they can C++ or Java, because the
learning curve is not so steep (although the ultimate distance climbed may be
long).

\---------------------------------

It immediately started the pub-brawl as expected, with Christopher Hogue being
the first to protest -

>

I find your "elitist" language and "one-true-way" argument subjective and
divisive.

"Fundamentally, moving from a lightweight Python layer on top of a heavier,
optimized C++ library into a standalone binary seems like a step backwards to
me."

Well, the mass of software running is lighter as a standalone binary, as there
is no language interpreter binary running in memory, so you have me confused
as to your definition of "lightweight" and "heavier".

This post seems like yet another argument for software implementation
tribalism (i.e. my language/tools approach is best!). I've been around long
enough to know that these arguments are always dependent on the tribal
language experience and context of the participants.

\-----------------------------------

If you have any doubt that academic labs do not operate like start ups,
Jared's comment should remove that.

> I think part of bioinformatics education should be learning to pick the
right tool for the job. This isn't a C++ library for accessing VCF files, its
a library for performing inference using very low-level data. I think the
developers that are interested in contributing in this space will be fairly
computationally sophisticated and willing to use C++. I hope.

Sure it would be nice if I had already had a well-designed library, bindings
to high-level language, etc, but this project is ~three months old and I have
limited time. I necessarily have to focus on the most important problems (how
well the program works, can anyone else run it?).

BYOB (and one for Titus) and enjoy the rest of the fight !

