---
title: 'Evolving gene regulatory networks into cellular networks guiding adaptive
  behavior: an outline how single cells could have evolved into a centralized neurosensory
  system'
categories:
- ncRNA
---
[Link](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25416504)
<!--more-->

> Understanding the evolution of the neurosensory system of man, able to
reflect on its own origin, is one of the major goals of comparative
neurobiology. Details of the origin of neurosensory cells, their aggregation
into central nervous systems and associated sensory organs and their localized
patterning leading to remarkably different cell types aggregated into variably
sized parts of the central nervous system have begun to emerge. Insights at
the cellular and molecular level have begun to shed some light on the
evolution of neurosensory cells, partially covered in this review. Molecular
evidence suggests that high mobility group (HMG) proteins of pre-metazoans
evolved into the definitive Sox [SRY (sex determining region Y)-box] genes
used for neurosensory precursor specification in metazoans. Likewise, pre-
metazoan basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) genes evolved in metazoans into the
group A bHLH genes dedicated to neurosensory differentiation in bilaterians.
Available evidence suggests that the Sox and bHLH genes evolved a cross-
regulatory network able to synchronize expansion of precursor populations and
their subsequent differentiation into novel parts of the brain or sensory
organs. Molecular evidence suggests metazoans evolved patterning gene networks
early, which were not dedicated to neuronal development. Only later in
evolution were these patterning gene networks tied into the increasing
complexity of diffusible factors, many of which were already present in pre-
metazoans, to drive local patterning events. It appears that the evolving
molecular basis of neurosensory cell development may have led, in interaction
with differentially expressed patterning genes, to local network modifications
guiding unique specializations of neurosensory cells into sensory organs and
various areas of the central nervous system.

