---
title: Top Ten Genomes - (i) Lamprey
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
The [Biology of
Genomes](http://meetings.cshl.edu/meetings/2015/genome15.shtml) conference is
taking place at CSHL this week, and therefore our blog will talk a lot about
genomes and researchers who work on genomes. After going through many genome
papers published over the last decade and more, we decided to pick a set of
ten most interesting genomes. Please feel free to suggest your choices, if you
disagree.
<!--more-->

\-------------------------

Our award for the most interesting genome goes to lamprey.

**1\. Evolutionary position**

For researchers interested in studying vertebrate biology, the lampreys hold a
special position in the phylogeny tree. The following figure from an UCL
website [explains why](http://www.ucl.ac.uk/museums-
static/obl4he/vertebratediversity/).

![Vertebrata_cladogram2](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/05/Vertebrata_cladogram2-300x250.png)

Lampreys dominated the seas before vertebrates with jaws came into existence,
and their genomes can tell us about the evolution of jawed vertebrates. Lack
of jaw does not mean lampreys go hungry in competition with other fish. The
following video can tell you how they live well by sucking blood from other
animals.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/-SYhOD1Yx10" frameborder="0"> </iframe>

This blood-sucking property of Lamprey had been noticed by people since
ancient times, including [an unusually cruel Roman
ruler](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vedius_Pollio).

> Publius Vedius Pollio (died 15 BC) was a Roman equestrian of the 1st century
BC, and a friend of the Roman emperor Augustus, who appointed him to a
position of authority in the province of Asia. In later life he became known
for his luxurious tastes and cruelty to his slaves when they displeased him,
he had them fed to lampreys (or morays) that he maintained for that purpose,
which was deemed to be an exceedingly cruel act. When Vedius tried to apply
this method of execution to a slave who broke a crystal cup, Emperor Augustus
(Pollio's guest at the time) was so appalled that he not only intervened to
prevent the execution but had all of Pollio's valuable drinking vessels
deliberately broken. This incident, along with Augustus's demolition of the
massive villa he inherited after Vedius's death in 15 BC, were frequently
referred to in antiquity in discussions of ethics and of the public role of
Augustus.

\--------------------------------

**2\. VLR immune system**

Lamprey genome does not only tell us about the evolution of jaws, but it also
informs about the evolution of our adaptive immune system. In a remarkable
discovery, Zev Pancer and colleagues found out about the presence of an
entirely new adaptive immune system in lamprey.

![pancer](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/pancer.jpg)

[Somatic diversification of variable lymphocyte receptors in the agnathan sea
lamprey](http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v430/n6996/abs/nature02740.html)

> Although jawless vertebrates are apparently capable of adaptive immune
responses, they have not been found to possess the recombinatorial antigen
receptors shared by all jawed vertebrates. Our search for the phylogenetic
roots of adaptive immunity in the lamprey has instead identified a new type of
variable lymphocyte receptors (VLRs) composed of highly diverse leucine-rich
repeats (LRR) sandwiched between amino- and carboxy-terminal LRRs. An
invariant stalk region tethers the VLRs to the cell surface by means of a
glycosyl-phosphatidyl-inositol anchor. To generate rearranged VLR genes of the
diversity necessary for an anticipatory immune system, the single lamprey VLR
locus contains a large bank of diverse LRR cassettes, available for insertion
into an incomplete germline VLR gene. Individual lymphocytes express a
uniquely rearranged VLR gene in monoallelic fashion. Different evolutionary
strategies were thus used to generate highly diverse lymphocyte receptors
through rearrangement of LRR modules in agnathans (jawless fish) and of
immunoglobulin gene segments in gnathostomes (jawed vertebrates).

Pancer and co-authors made their discovery without help from the genome
sequence. When the lamprey genome was sequenced, it was found that the genome
included orthologs of other components of vertebrate adaptive immune systems.
Therefore, the immune system of lamprey is not at all 'primitive'.

[Lamprey immunity is far from
primitive](http://www.pnas.org/content/110/15/5746.extract)

> The adaptive immune systems of vertebrates provide remarkable examples of
evolutionary innovation. This is most evident in the unusual mechanisms that
jawed vertebrates have invented to create and deploy T-cell receptor and Ig
diversity. In a series of papers published over the past decade (detailed
below), the variable lymphocyte receptors of the jawless vertebrates (VLRs)
(Fig. 1A) have emerged as an equally powerful example of evolutionary novelty.
This story of parallel solutions to the challenge of nonself recognition is
made all of the more compelling when one considers the wider system in which
these receptors function. Although the V(D)J system of mammals and the VLR
system of the agnathans are structurally unrelated, their diversity is
expressed and selected in the context of lymphocytic cells that at some level
share homology. This similarity offers enormous opportunity for understanding
how novel immune mechanisms evolve and are incorporated into a background of
more ancient cell regulatory networks. In PNAS, Das et al. (1) present another
advance in the understanding of the VLR-based adaptive immune system. Using
the lamprey genome sequence (2) and cDNA sequences, the authors characterize
the generation of diversity in the third lamprey VLR locus (VLRC) and
establish yet another variation on how immune specificity is created.

Given that the Biology of Genome conference always includes those making major
genomic discoveries as keynote speakers, Zeev Pancer could have easily become
the one in 2015 for his remarkable discovery. Sadly [he passed away in 2014](h
ttp://www.umbc.edu/blogs/imet/2014/04/we_remember_prof_zeev_pancer.html) at a
relatively young age (56).

\--------------------------------

**3\. Genome shrinks**

![Amemiya_zps63c64c7d](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2015/05
/Amemiya_zps63c64c7d-300x194.jpg)

In another unusual observation about the lamprey genome, Jeramiah Smith from
Chris Amemiya's group reported that a large chunk (~20%) got deleted, when the
lampreys developed from single cell to multi-cellular organism. That is very
surprising and rather unexpected for a genome. How does it know, which parts
to get rid of? Nobody knows that answer yet. In fact, it was observed that the
deleted parts included some coding genes and not just junk DNA.

[Fish Throws Away Its Genes as It
Grows](http://news.sciencemag.org/biology/2009/06/fish-throws-away-its-genes-
it-grows)

> Whether it's its extraterrestrial looks or status as a "living fossil,"
there's always been something fishy about the sea lamprey. Now scientists have
added another oddity to the creature's repertoire: The lamprey jettisons 20%
of its genome during development.

Jeramiah Smith of the University of Washington, Seattle, first suspected
something strange while piecing together the sea lamprey's genetic sequence.
The postdoctoral fellow and his colleagues tried labeling live lamprey cells
using a technique that detects broken DNA. "Every cell in the embryo was
[labeled] as dying," he recalls. So he took a closer look to see what was
going on and got a big surprise.

Working with Chris Amemiya of the Benaroya Research Institute at Virginia
Mason in Seattle, the group found that lamprey sperm DNA had sequences not
found in lamprey liver and that overall the sperm genome was millions of bases
longer. The sperm DNA included a highly repetitive sequence called Germ1, and
by monitoring the loss of Germ1 during development, Smith was able to track
the genome's reorganization.

\--------------------------------

**4\. Genome assembly**

![Jeramiah](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/05/Jeramiah.png)

[Photo courtesy: Chris Amemiya]

Those working on genome assembly also finds the lamprey genome a rewarding
challenge. Regions of this GC-rich genome are inaccessible to sequencing
technologies with GC-bias. To add to the troubles, the genome is highly
polymorphic and very hard to assemble. To add to the troubles, the genome has
nearly 100 pairs of (nuclear) chromosomes !!

The somatic genome of sea lamprey was published in 2013.

[Sequencing of the sea lamprey (Petromyzon marinus) genome provides insights
into vertebrate
evolution](http://www.nature.com/ng/journal/v45/n4/full/ng.2568.html)

> Lampreys are representatives of an ancient vertebrate lineage that diverged
from our own ~500 million years ago. By virtue of this deeply shared ancestry,
the sea lamprey (P. marinus) genome is uniquely poised to provide insight into
the ancestry of vertebrate genomes and the underlying principles of vertebrate
biology. Here, we present the first lamprey whole-genome sequence and
assembly. We note challenges faced owing to its high content of repetitive
elements and GC bases, as well as the absence of broad-scale sequence
information from closely related species. Analyses of the assembly indicate
that two whole-genome duplications likely occurred before the divergence of
ancestral lamprey and gnathostome lineages. Moreover, the results help define
key evolutionary events within vertebrate lineages, including the origin of
myelin-associated proteins and the development of appendages. The lamprey
genome provides an important resource for reconstructing vertebrate origins
and the evolutionary events that have shaped the genomes of extant organisms.

\--------------------------------

**5\. Six hox clusters**

![head-shot](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/head-
shot.jpg)

In another surprising observation, Tarang Mehta from B. Venkatesh's group in
Singapore discovered the lamprey genome to have six Hox clusters. Why is that
unusual? The number of Hox clusters is an indicator of the number of times the
organism's genome went through whole-genome duplication. Based on position on
phylogenetic tree, it was believed that lampreys went through one or two
rounds of whole genome duplication, and therefore have two or four hox
clusters. The observation about six hox clusters complicates everything we
know about vertebrate genome evolution and whole genome duplication.

[Evidence for at least six Hox clusters in the Japanese lamprey (Lethenteron
japonicum)](http://www.pnas.org/content/110/40/16044.short)

> Lampreys and hagfishes (cyclostomes) are the only living group of jawless
vertebrates and therefore are important for the study of vertebrate evolution.
We have characterized Hox clusters in the Japanese lamprey (Lethenteron
japonicum), and shown that it contains at least six Hox clusters as compared
with four Hox clusters in tetrapods. This suggests that the lamprey lineage
has undergone an additional round of genome duplication compared with
tetrapods. Several conserved noncoding elements (CNEs) were predicted in the
Hox clusters of lamprey, elephant shark, and human. Transgenic assay of CNEs
demonstrated their potential to function as cis-regulatory elements. Thus,
these CNEs may represent part of the core set of cis-regulatory elements that
were present in the common ancestor of vertebrates.

\---------------------------------

**6\. Evolution of Vertebrate Neural Crest and Gene Regulatory Network**

![1880824_orig](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2015/05
/1880824_orig-300x253.jpg)

[Eric Davidson's latest book](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/05/01/a
-must-read-book-if-you-like-to-understand-genomes/) includes several sections
on lamprey. That is no surprise given that lampreys hold an unique position in
phylogenetic tree to connect sea urchins and vertebrates. Davidson's lab
focuses on sea urchin, and Marianne Bronner, one of his Caltech colleagues, is
using Davidson's gene regulatory network methodlogy to study the evolution of
vertebrate neural crest, with lamprey being the organism of her lab's focus.

![4684058](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/4684058.jpg)

\---------------------------------------------

**7\. Life cycle of sea lamprey**

Chris Amemiya added that the life history of sea lamprey is equally
interesting. The following picture from a [New York State Department
website](http://www.dec.ny.gov/animals/7242.html) explains it well, and to
find the unusual part, check the time periods marked near the periphery of the
circle. These amazing creatures spend nearly four years as larvae and then
only 12 months as adults !!

![lifecycle](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/lifecycle-
300x219.jpg)

[More from the website](http://www.dec.ny.gov/animals/7242.html) \-

>

**Life Cycle - How does it live and breed?**

**Ammocoetes**

**A Larval Lamprey**

The blind worm-like larval lamprey, known as ammocoetes [am-mah-seats], can
grow up to 5 inches long. They hatch from eggs in gravel nests in tributaries
and drift downstream with the current. When they locate suitable habitat -
usually silt/sand stream bottoms and banks in slower moving stretches of water
- they burrow in and take up residence, filter-feeding on algae, detritus and
microscopic organisms and materials. In the Lake Champlain Basin this stage of
the sea lamprey's life cycle usually lasts 3 to 4 years; in other waters
lamprey spend up to 10 years in their larval form.

**Transformers**

Sometime in mid to late summer of their third or fourth year the ammocoetes
undergo a dramatic change in both form and function. They develop eyes and a
suction disk mouth, and become a smaller version of the adult sea lamprey.
Also during this stage their kidneys change to allow them to live in
saltwater. Once the ammocoetes change is complete, the newly transformed sea
lamprey, known as a transformer, leaves its burrow and moves downstream
towards Lake Champlain. The sea lamprey is then ready to begin the next stage
in its life as a parasite of fish. The juvenile sea lamprey move into deeper
water and begin to seek host fish on which to feed.

**Parasitic Juveniles**

The juvenile sea lamprey uses its suction disk mouth which is filled with
small sharp, rasping teeth and a file-like tongue to attach to fish, puncture
the skin, and drain the fish's body fluids. An anticoagulant in their saliva
ensures that the blood of the host fish does not clot while the sea lamprey
feed. Often the host fish die from loss of blood, or infections resulting from
stress. Fish that survive sea lamprey attacks will have decreased
reproduction. Sea lamprey in Lake Champlain prefer landlocked Atlantic salmon
(salmon), lake trout and other trout species, due to their small scales and
thin skin. The same native fish species prized by anglers, and that are such
an important part of the natural ecosystem of the lake.

Sea lamprey also feed on other fish species, including lake whitefish,
walleye, northern pike, burbot, and lake sturgeon. The lake sturgeon is listed
as a threatened species in New York and an endangered species in Vermont and
it is likely that sea lamprey are affecting their survival. Most sea lamprey
hosts are native fish species that have been part of the Lake Champlain Basin
ecosystem for thousands of years.

**Spawning**

In the spring, sexually mature adult sea lamprey migrate up tributaries to
spawn. They locate spawning streams by following pheromones (naturally
produced chemical attractants) released by ammocoetes living in those waters.
A pair of male and female sea lamprey build a nest, called a redd, in a gravel
stream bottom in section of flowing water. The female lays tens of thousands
of eggs and the male fertilizes them, then having completed this act the sea
lamprey die. The eggs lie in the small spaces between the gravel, and are
provided oxygen by the flowing water. Weeks later the eggs hatch and the
complex life cycle of the sea lamprey begins again.

