---
title: Oxford Nanopore Blows Up Lab, Raises $150M
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/07/Capture6-300x105.png)
<!--more-->

It appears that the chemists at Oxford Nanopore are as competent [as their
bioinformaticians](https://twitter.com/ewanbirney). On July 8th, BBC reported
that three people were injured in a "violent chemical reaction" at the
company. The violent chemical reaction, as it turns out, happened due to
mixing of nitric acid and alcohol, [which is a complete no-no for any
chemistry procedure](http://blogs.nature.com/stepwise/2013/10/01/caution-dont-
mix-concentrated-nitric-acid-with-organic-solvents) ([also see
this](http://blog.chembark.com/2011/10/02/explosion-at-u-maryland-another-
nitric-acid-oopsie/)) except [by those working for
ISIS](http://www.haaretz.com/news/middle-east/.premium-1.667092). Thankfully
all injured employees have been discharged from the hospital.

Readers can find additional details here -

[Update: Three people injured after chemical incident closes parts of Oxford
Science Park](http://www.oxfordtimes.co.uk/news/yourtown/oxford/13375689.Updat
e__Three_people_injured_after_chemical_incident_closes_parts_of_Oxford_Science
_Park/)

[Oxford Science Park chemical incident - three
injured](http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-england-oxfordshire-33439986)

\---------------------------------

In other news, [the company raised $109M](http://www.lse.co.uk/AllNews.asp?cod
e=lqgil0zg&headline=IP_Group_Says_Oxford_Nanopore_Raises_GBP70_Million_In_Fund
ing_Round) and sports a valuation of $1.55B (GBP 1B) !! Pacbio, their closest
competitor, [is valued at only $399M at today's closing price](http://finance.
yahoo.com/q?s=pacb&fr=uh3_finance_web_gs_ctrl2&uhb=uhb2).

[IP Group Says Oxford Nanopore Raises GBP70 Million In Funding Round](http://w
ww.lse.co.uk/AllNews.asp?code=lqgil0zg&headline=IP_Group_Says_Oxford_Nanopore_
Raises_GBP70_Million_In_Funding_Round)

> LONDON (Alliance News) - FTSE 250-listed intellectual property company IP
Group PLC on Tuesday said its Oxford Nanopore Technologies Ltd portfolio
company has raised GBP70 million in a new financing round.

Oxford Nanopore is an Oxford University spin-out focused on nanopore-based
electronic molecular analysis systems.

Following the completion of the financing found, which attracted existing and
new investors in the UK, US and Europe, IP Group's undiluted stake of 19.9% in
Oxford Nanopore is now valued at GBP192.9 million, representing an unrealised
fair value gain for IP Group on its investment of GBP50.3 million.

IP invested another GBP13.9 million in Oxford Nanopore in the latest funding
round.

It is quite ironic that one of the organizations funding Oxford Nanopore is
also named [ISIS Innovation](http://isis-innovation.com/success-stories/gene-
sequencing-oxford-nanopore-technologies/), but we do not see any connection
with the middle eastern group of same name or 'violent chemical reactions'.

\---------------------------------

What is the future of this company? Clearly, every round of extra financing
acts like death spiral, because the company needs to back it up with that much
revenue to support its valuation. For example, a $750M valuation would require
them to sell 750K individual sequencers at $1K price (assuming revenue parity
for valuation in lieu of discounted cash flow). With $1.5B valuation, that
expectation goes up to 1.5M sequencers. The other possibility is to sell big
machines instead of isolated sequencers, but that takes away the
distinguishing factor for the company.

Another troubling aspect is that even with this much funding, the company
seems to have outsourced its bioinformatics to the public funding sources
(e.g. [Mick Watson: "we have an active grant to develop poRe, software we are
writing to help scientists access and use MinION sequence
data"](https://biomickwatson.wordpress.com/2015/07/17/4-predictions-about-
nanopore-sequencing-in-the-next-12-months/)). Will public funding be used to
support various informatics requests from 750K or 1.5M different users?

P. S. Several readers asked me about Mick Watson's hilarious ['4 predictions
about nanopore sequencing in the next 12
months'](https://biomickwatson.wordpress.com/2015/07/17/4-predictions-about-
nanopore-sequencing-in-the-next-12-months/). Human genome? Hahaha !! Wake me
up, when someone assembles a previously unassembled fungal or bacterial genome
using ONT sequencing only. Also, his stressing of "all of the above will be
possible without seeing a single A, G, C, or T (i.e. it will all be possible
without base-calling the data)" seems to suggest that he does not believe Ewan
Birney's claim about 92% accuracy of ONT sequences at the nucleotide level.
Neither do we, because [Birney is a proven liar exposed by Dan
Graur](http://gbe.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2013/02/20/gbe.evt02).

