---
title: 'Today''s thought-provoking paper - Evolution evolves: physiology returns to
  centre stage'
categories:
- ncRNA
---
Today's thought-provoking paper -
[link](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1113/jphysiol.2014.273151/pdf)
<!--more-->

> The wide-ranging set of articles published in this issue reveal a major
challenge both for the physiological sciences and for evolutionary biology. As
the integration between the two proceeds, neither can remain unchanged.
Evolutionary theory requires extension or even replacement, while
physiological science needs to address the exciting possibilities opened up
for the future. We hope that our article, and those published here, will
enable both disciplines to respond effectively to that challenge.

The mentioned paper is the introduction to an entire issue of The Journal of
Physiology.

\---------------------------

About [the author](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Denis_Noble) \-

> Noble's research focuses on using computer models of biological organs and
organ systems to interpret function from the molecular level to the whole
organism.

> He plays classical guitar and sings Occitan troubadour and folk songs
(OxfordTrobadors). In addition to English, he has lectured in French on
YouTube, Italian on YouTube, Occitan, Japanese and Korean.[41]

\---------------------------

His book (pdf available [here](http://musicoflife.co.uk/pdfs/The%20Music%20of
%20Life-sourcebook.pdf)) -

[The Music of Life: Biology Beyond Genes](http://www.amazon.com/The-Music-
Life-Biology-Beyond/dp/0199295735)

> The gene's eye view of life, proposed in Richard Dawkins acclaimed
bestseller The Selfish Gene, sees living bodies as mere vehicles for the
replication of genetic codes. But in The Music of Life, world renowned
physiologist Denis Noble argues that, to truly understand life, we must look
beyond the "selfish gene" to consider life on a much wider variety of levels.

Life, Noble asserts, is a kind of music, a symphonic interplay between genes,
cells, organs, body, and environment. He weaves this musical metaphor
throughout this personal and deeply lyrical work, illuminating ideas that
might otherwise be daunting to non-scientists. In elegant prose, Noble sets
out a cutting-edge alternative to the gene's eye view, offering a radical
switch of perception in which genes are seen as prisoners and the organism
itself is a complex system of many interacting levels. In his more expansive
view, life emerges as a process, the ebb and flow of activity in an intricate
web of connections. He introduces readers to the realm of systems biology, a
field that has been growing in strength in the past decade. Noble, himself one
of the founders of this field, argues modern systems biology may be the view
we need to adopt to gain a deeper understanding of the nature of life.

Drawing on his experiences in his research on the heartbeat, and on
evolutionary biology, development, medicine, philosophy, linguistics, and
Chinese culture, Noble presents us with a profound and very modern reflection
on the nature of life.

\---------------------------------------

Warning !

Larry Moran of Sandwalk is [not very happy with these
physiologists](http://sandwalk.blogspot.com/2015/04/physiologists-fall-for-
third-way.html).

