---
title: Francis Collins is Out Again with 'New' Ideas on How to Waste Other People's
  Money
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
![images \(1\)](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/01/images-1.jpg)
<!--more-->

Merely three months back, Francis Collins was telling everyone how his
organization could have developed Ebola vaccine day before yesterday, if
Congress gave him little more money. That claim was derided by many including
[Mike Eisen in his blog](http://www.michaeleisen.org/blog/?p=1638) who
suggested that Collins invest in basic research instead of chasing the latest
trend. Now all that is forgotten. Today, in yet another article published in
medical literature, Francis Collins declared where any new money will be going
(hint - <del>personalized</del> precision medicine).

[A New Initiative on Precision
Medicine](http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMp1500523)

The last paragraph sums it all -

> This initiative will also require new resources; these should not compete
with support of existing programs, especially in a difficult fiscal climate.
With sufficient resources and a strong, sustained commitment of time, energy,
and ingenuity from the scientific, medical, and patient communities, the full
potential of precision medicine can ultimately be realized to give everyone
the best chance at good health.

Readers should note that Collins had been promising the moon and asking for
more money for a long time. Here is an article [he published in JAMA in
1999](http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJM199907013410106) telling you
what 2010 would look like, if you gave him more money. None of these promises
ever came true.

> **A HYPOTHETICAL CASE IN 2010**

General visions of gene-based medicine in the future are useful, but many
health care providers are probably still puzzled by how it will affect the
daily practice of medicine in a primary care setting. A hypothetical clinical
encounter in 2010 is described here.

John, a 23-year-old college graduate, is referred to his physician because a
serum cholesterol level of 255 mg per deciliter was detected in the course of
a medical examination required for employment. He is in good health but has
smoked one pack of cigarettes per day for six years. Aided by an interactive
computer program that takes Johns family history, his physician notes that
there is a strong paternal history of myocardial infarction and that Johns
father died at the age of 48 years.

To obtain more precise information about his risks of contracting coronary
artery disease and other illnesses in the future, John agrees to consider a
battery of genetic tests that are available in 2010. After working through an
interactive computer program that explains the benefits and risks of such
tests, John agrees (and signs informed consent) to undergo 15 genetic tests
that provide risk information for illnesses for which preventive strategies
are available. He decides against an additional 10 tests involving disorders
for which no clinically validated preventive interventions are yet available.

A cheek-swab DNA specimen is sent off for testing, and the results are
returned in one week (Table 1). Johns subsequent counseling session with the
physician and a genetic nurse specialist focuses on the conditions for which
his risk differs substantially (by a factor of more than two) from that of the
general population. Like most patients, John is interested in both his
relative risk and his absolute risk.

John is pleased to learn that genetic testing does not always give bad news
his risks of contracting prostate cancer and Alzheimers disease are reduced,
because he carries low-risk variants of the several genes known in 2010 to
contribute to these illnesses. But John is sobered by the evidence of his
increased risks of contracting coronary artery disease, colon cancer, and lung
cancer. Confronted with the reality of his own genetic data, he arrives at
that crucial teachable moment when a lifelong change in health-related
behavior, focused on reducing specific risks, is possible. And there is much
to offer. By 2010, the field of pharmacogenomics has blossomed, and a
prophylactic drug regimen based on the knowledge of Johns personal genetic
data can be precisely prescribed to reduce his cholesterol level and the risk
of coronary artery disease to normal levels. His risk of colon cancer can be
addressed by beginning a program of annual colonoscopy at the age of 45, which
in his situation is a very cost-effective way to avoid colon cancer. His
substantial risk of contracting lung cancer provides the key motivation for
him to join a support group of persons at genetically high risk for serious
complications of smoking, and he successfully kicks the habit.

