---
title: Refugee Crisis - a Vivid Description of What is Currently Going on in Europe
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
![MigrantDrone8_0](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/11/MigrantDrone8_0-300x197.png)
<!--more-->

Given that the larger point of the [current retraction argument over
treefinder](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/11/10/bmc-springer-sends-
shockwave-through-bioinformatics-community/) is the refugee crisis in Europe,
it is worth spending some time on the topic. Zerohedge posted a set of amazing
photos showing how many people are currently entering various countries. You
can find them in "[New Drone Footage Captures Scope Of EU's Migrant Crisis As
Brussels Plans Refugee "Holding
Camps"](http://www.zerohedge.com/news/2015-10-26/new-drone-images-capture-
scope-eus-migrant-crisis-brussels-plans-refugee-holding-cam)". Smaller eastern
European countries are getting completely overwhelmed with the number of
refugees reaching nearly 10% of their current population.

Government-funded greedy academics have been completely silent about the fact
that the source of the crisis is Obama's illegal invasion of Libya and Syria,
and supporting of Nazi-flag-totting Azov battalion in Ukraine. He managed to
destroy the government of two countries and is trying to do the same in
another through ISIS proxies (check "[Video: U.S. Apache Attack Helicopter
Follows Behind ISIS Convoy Doesnt Fire a Single
Shot](http://www.washingtonsblog.com/2015/11/video-u-s-apache-attack-
helicopter-follows-behind-isis-convoy-into-syria-from-iraq-doesnt-fire-a
-single-shot.html)"). The following blog post from cluborlov blog connects the
dots, and provides very informative description of what is not being reported
by the mainstream German press. You can read it in German, Italian, French and
Russian in the following links.

\------------------------------------

[An Exit Strategy for Traitors - Alex
S.](http://cluborlov.blogspot.com/2015/11/an-exit-strategy-for-traitors.html)

[[Ein Fluchtplan fr Verrter](http://cluborlov.blogspot.com/2015/11/ein-
fluchtplan-fur-verrater.html)]

[[Une strategie de sortie pour les
tratres](http://cluborlov.blogspot.com/2015/11/strategie-de-sortie-pour-les-
traitres.html)]

[[????????????? ????????? ?????](http://cluborlov.blogspot.com/2015/11
/predatelskaya-strategiya-uxoda.html)]

[[Una strategia di uscita per
Traditori](http://umbertomarabese.blogspot.com/2015/11/cluborlov-una-
strategia-di-uscita-per.html)]

[Germanythe country at the center of the European Union and its economic
powerhouseis something of a black hole. 70 years after the fall of Nazism, it
is still an occupied country, under military and political domination of the
US. The national press, popularly referred to as Lgenpresse (the lying press)
faithfully echoes the party line set in Washington. Germany's spineless
politicians, popularly renamed from Volksvertreter (people's representatives)
to Volksverrter (traitors to the people) are no better. And so we are unable
to see what is actually happening there, as the European Union is, in the
words of Russia's FM Sergei Lavrov, committing suicide by letting in the
invading hordes from the Middle East. And so this short report by Alex, who
tells us what he sees, is most welcome.]

Do you remember the last time you saw a man with wild eyes, strange clothes
and a giant sign around his neck saying The End Is Nigh? How ridiculous and
pathetic! you might have thought. Now, imagine the reality of your country
changing within weeks to a point where you come to the same conclusion as him,
suddenly feeling that his approach might be ever so reasonable. When a large
part of your fellow-humans catch a strange sort of illness, one which leads to
complete insanity faster than in the worst zombie outbreak, you might find
yourself out of more viable strategies.

This exactly is happening to me, as well as most people I know, right now,
right here in our export-champion, model-democracy Germany. Sane people are
finding themselves isolated and helpless amid insane politicians, an
antagonistic press, paralyzed communities and a large inert populace unable to
even fathom whats happening. I am of course talking about the so-called
refugee crisis, but because even this name is working against us, I will call
it what it really isa war against Europe by means of invasion. It is now
vitally important to call things by their right name, because this
distinguishes friend from foe.

But it is even more important is to understand why this is a war rather than a
crisis caused by refugees. Everything about this development bears the
hallmarks of a military/intelligence operation.

First of all, look at the timing and the scale. It really took off around
September, and within less then two month it is already threatening the
stability of Europe as a whole, to a point where even the European Leaders are
talking about the end of the European Union. Credible numbers are not
available, but the German government estimates the number of refugees that
have already arrived somewhere between one and two million, so the real number
is probably much larger. Almost all the camps are crammed with far more people
than is claimed. Some towns are being forced to cope with more refugees than
they have citizens, some double as many. The estimates for next year amount to
something between two and five million more refugees.

Ask yourself, why would millions of men (the overwhelming majority are young
men) suddenly and collectively decide to leave their families behind, leave
their country, travel thousands of miles and head for either Germany, Austria
or Sweden, ignoring all the other safe countries on the way? Who told them
that this would be worth it? Where did they all get the money to pay for it?
Why was there absolutely no effort at any border to stop them? Why did this
not start earlier? After all, the middle east has been a war zone for
yearsever since the USA exploited 9/11 to start spreading democracy. How could
this happen within days, weeks at most. Did the first hundred thousand send a
message to the rest that it was OK for them to come too? If so, how?

Secondly, look at the character of the average refugee. Why are they all well-
fed, well-clothed, self-confident young men showing no signs of stress or
hardship? Why are they leaving their families behind? Do they know their wives
and children can follow them later? If so, how? Why do these men not want to
stay behind and try to rescue their countries? Why do they all own high-
quality mobile phones charged with seemingly endless minutes? It is clear that
the refugees have been briefed on exactly what kinds of social benefits they
can demand, and how to go about doing it, and so they are audacious and become
violent if met with resistance. They even demand expensive medical treatments,
which are granted and taken for granted. Why? There are no background checks
for any of these peoplenaturally, because there is no time to do ten thousand-
plus background checks every day. For all we know, these people could be
criminals, mercenaries and terrorists. An unknown number have serious
diseases, such as hepatitis, TB and even the plague. No one keeps track of
that, no one registered them, no one limits their freedom of movement. Those
who register do so mostly with forged Syrian passports, which Turkey hands out
like candy, even to black Africans who look nothing like the Syrians. Tens of
thousands of refugees have disappeared from their camps, some even stopped the
special trains midway to their destinations by pulling the emergency brake and
ran off into the wilderness. Where to and whyno one knows. No one asks
questions, but what is clear is that we have completely lost control over
European territory.

Thirdly, there is the little matter of collaboration and treason. Even if this
is a genuine refugee crisis, why is that none of the policies of the
German/European government make any sense? And why is the press acting
continuously and uniformly in favor of their policies, and is downright
hostile toward the European populace? If millions of people have to flee
immediate peril, there are a lot of different ways to care for them without
endangering the integrity of Europe and ruining several national budgets. But
instead of discussing what to do, how to do it and how to pay for it, the plan
seemed to be predetermined, decided and fixed long ago.

The political solution is to soak every city and town in Germany, Austria and
Sweden with people of unknown origin and intention. Flanked by a press hailing
the process, underestimating their numbers and suppressing reports of crimes
committed by the refugees, damning and demonizing every form of opposition.
Every branch of government, all authorities and parties, in concert with the
press, stand should to shoulder in pushing this agenda against the
overwhelming indignation of their citizens and closing their eyes to the fact
that this is against the law. Censorship, propaganda, hate speech, defamation
and open rejection of basic democratic rights against any opposition, are
simply exploding right now. A prime example of this is Germany's vice
chancellor Sigmar Gabriel, who called an undefined but large part of the
German populace who dare to oppose this insanity Pack (vermin).

Everyone who takes a stand in Germany now, opposing any refugee-related policy
by the government, is subjected to insults is labelled as a right-wing
extremist, a hateful criminal and a danger to society. Some get singled out
and persecuted in public using extensive defamation campaigns. The author Akif
Pirinci became the latest victim after giving a speech at the PEGIDA demo, the
accusation against him based on a shameless misrepresentation of the facts.

Even the most peaceful protest is immediately threatened with a ban (but most
are still granted permission anyway). Every speech or publication mentioning
treason or comparable accusations is instantly subject to investigations under
the charge of demagoguery or threat of violence. Current examples can be found
daily in the major mainstream outlets such as Der Spiegel, Die Welt, Bild and
the like. If this situation came about by chance, such a spontaneous consensus
would have been extremely unlikely. But from day one this has been an obvious
propaganda/defamation campaign against the truth and against the interests of
the European populace.

The German press even earned itself a new name that sticks: Lgenpresse (the
lying press) is a word that can be heard on every corner. In private, the
politicians are being called traitors all the time.

The national railroad company is ordered to offer special trains free of
charge for the refugees, bringing them into every corner of Germany the
fastest way possible while delaying regular trains.

Vacant houses and apartments are confiscated by force and given over to the
refugees free of charge. Every refugee given rental housing is paid for by the
communities, as much as 500 Euros per person per month. This is a big
opportunity for some scumbags to make money really fast, by making, ill and
elderly Germans homeless.

The police and the press have been ordered to suppress reports of any crimes
the refugees commit, and so you will not find any in the press, nor even in
police reports. But if you ask around, you will hear plenty of stories about
rampant assaults and rapes in every city and many towns in Germany. Some
refugee camps burned down, but most were burned down by their inhabitants,
mostly in protest or because of minor disagreements. Police sirens are heard
in every city every hour now.

When the refugees started shoplifting, then raiding supermarkets, the
government told the retailers to keep quiet about this, and has been paying
for everything that was damaged or stolen ever since. The only exceptions are
alcohol and cigarettesall other retail goods are free, no questions asked.

The small business sector has declared the refugees unemployable, due to zero
qualifications, unwillingness to work and lack of language skills. However,
the experts in the press somehow see a big opportunity to grow the economy.
There is no critical discussion and no plan for the future. The only advice
Chancellor Merkel gave to Germany was Wir schaffen das (We will do it), not
elaborating exactly what we will do, nor how. But anyone brave enough to think
for themselves can easily guess.

To keep it short, any political common sense and human instinct would prohibit
such reckless, potentially irreversible, not to mention illegal behavior. Its
end result is clearly visible: it is either the ruin of Europemainly the
countries targeted by the refugees, which are Germany, Austria and Swedenor
war. Since I dont believe that either coincidences or stupidity of this
magnitude is possible, this is either treason or high treason. At least two
charges have been filed against the current government, one for organized
immigration crimes, and just recently for high treason. About 400 people
became party to this action afterward. They are unlikely to succeed, because
the judiciary is complicit. But if it isnt obviously high treason now, it will
become so within weekscalled out by everyone, because there is no end in
sight.

The rest of organized society is equally treasonous. The press has openly
declared itself an enemy of democracy and the general public, and at best a
collaborators. The church, even while immediately threatened by violent Islam,
prays for more immigrants, damning people who dare to utter doubts. The
intelligentsia is either silent or applauds our altruism. The treason is
complete. Police and the military are completely overwhelmed. The military was
reduced in size long ago to the point of utter ineffectiveness and has been
stressed out by international missions. The police is simply not equipped to
handle millions of potential enemies fanned out all over Europe, awaiting the
order to attack.

For foreign observers, this may sound far fetched and exaggerated. But
consider this: in some areas of Germany, when you call the police now, no one
will answer the phone. When they do, they are unable to do anything. A friend
of mine called the police hotline (not the regular local emergency number) and
was advised to form some sort of militia to solve the problem. A town of 600
has a dozen policemen at most, but often around a thousand refugees to handle.
No one will come to their help if these refugees decide to take what they seem
to believe is theirs alreadybecause someone told them so, I guess. We are
adrift in a sea of enemies, and the front-line in this war will run along the
welcome mats at our front doors.

I find myself in a nightmare unable to wake up. Most people feel helpless and
unwilling to accept the sad truth: we have been betrayed by everyone (except
perhaps the police and the military) we entrusted with our safety and our
hopes for the future. Even though the end of the global economy in its current
form seemed a given to me, this kind of treason and ill intent to bring it all
down took me by surprise. Among the twenty or so people I talked to about this
in confidence, absolutely everyone is convinced that this is heading toward
civil warand fast! The only question remaining is whether the Germans start
it, or the refugees, or some other party. We are one mayor terror attack away
from sheer chaos. I have heard from several people connected to European
security circles that the illegal weapons market is completely sold out, with
many dealers holding on to their weapons for their own personal use. This is a
rumour, but since we have been forced to depend on hearsay for any real
information right now, I tend to believe it.

There is a small protest movement making headlines in Germany and even
internationally. The PEGIDA movement has been gathering every Monday in
Dresden to protest European immigration policy for a whole year now. They have
had plenty of support since bad immigration policy has given rise to this
manufactured Vlkerwanderung (mass migration). On the October 19the one-year
anniversary gatheringaround 35-40 thousand people came to protest peacefully,
only to be attacked by several thousand violent protesters from the Antifa
movement. An allegedly anti-fascist group, so violent and fascist in their
behavior they would make for excellent recruiting material for the actual
fascists of the SA or the NSDAP. One of the PEGIDA followers was beaten and
severely wounded with a metal pole even before the gathering started. Several
hundred policemen had to fight for their lives for hours. The Antifa, which is
known to many as the second executive of the government, is nothing but an
effective mobile force to quell resistance, exactly like the SA, only without
the nice uniforms. Wherever demonstrations are announced, the Antifa members
will travel there to express their opinion with hard-hitting arguments.

Unsurprisingly, PEGIDA is a prime target for hatred and defamation right now.
As small as it is, the establishment seems to consider it as real danger,
since their complete press gag order against it during the last year did not
choke it off. But as important as they might be locally, the outcome seems to
be irreversible. The invasion has succeeded already. With each passing day the
numbers turn more and more against us. By now the best outcome is a civil war
within months, reversing this development. The worst outcome is complete
disintegration of European nations within the next few years, rendering large
parts of the continent ungovernable. The divorce between the government and
the people is almost complete by now. No sane person believes the press or the
politicians. The ones who do retreat into fantasies of hate and self hatred.
Never before was it more visible to me that this society is completely broken,
with every key element, acting against both individual and collective
interests, seemingly following orders while digging their own graves.

Once again, unquestioning obedience has taken over German society, but this
time without the consent by the masses, because this time the final solution
concerns them. The chaos that will follow will by no means be an accident: it
is engineered and ordered.

Once again, yet another generation will have to answer to their grandchildren:
How could you let this happen?

Alex S.

