---
title: How Much of Evolution is Influenced by Extinction?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
I finished reading a wonderful book that I recommend to everyone trying to
understand evolution. It was written by [paleontologist David M.
Raup](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_M._Raup), who passed away last
month. My curiosity was piqued by the Sandwalk blog, which [recommended it as
one of the top five books on
evolution](http://sandwalk.blogspot.com/2015/08/david-m-raup-1933-2015.html).
<!--more-->

![51KZXavoH8L._SX326_BO1,204,203,200_](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/08/51KZXavoH8L._SX326_BO1204203200_-197x300.jpg)

Raup argued that given the high rate (99.9%) of species ever living on earth
dying out (going extinct), the mode of extinction should play a dominant role
in evolution, but what if a large fraction of those extinctions took place due
to rare natural catastrophes (such as rocks hitting the earth from sky)?
Shouldn't then the biologists pay less attention to fitness of genes and more
to the unpredictable natural events? For a quick introduction to the topic
covered, readers may take a look at Raup's 1994 PNAS paper - ["The role of
extinction in evolution"](http://www.pnas.org/content/91/15/6758).

> The extinction of species is not normally considered an important element of
neodarwinian theory, in contrast to the opposite phenomenon, speciation. This
is surprising in view of the special importance Darwin attached to extinction,
and because the number of species extinctions in the history of life is almost
the same as the number of originations; present-day biodiversity is the result
of a trivial surplus of originations, cumulated over millions of years. For an
evolutionary biologist to ignore extinction is probably as foolhardy as for a
demographer to ignore mortality. The past decade has seen a resurgence of
interest in extinction, yet research on the topic is still at a reconnaissance
level, and our present understanding of its role in evolution is weak. Despite
uncertainties, extinction probably contains three important elements. (i) For
geographically widespread species, extinction is likely only if the killing
stress is one so rare as to be beyond the experience of the species, and thus
outside the reach of natural selection. (ii) The largest mass extinctions
produce major restructuring of the biosphere wherein some successful groups
are eliminated, allowing previously minor groups to expand and diversify.
(iii) Except for a few cases, there is little evidence that extinction is
selective in the positive sense argued by Darwin. It has generally been
impossible to predict, before the fact, which species will be victims of an
extinction event.

