---
title: Several Flaws in Ewan Birney's Description of Publicly Funded Science
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Matt Ridley wrote an article titled ["The Myth of Basic
Science"](http://www.wsj.com/articles/the-myth-of-basic-science-1445613954) in
Wall Street journal. The points made there are very similar to ["Government is
the Mother of All Invention"](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/06/15
/government-is-the-mother-of-all-invention/) post of us from 2013.
<!--more-->

It is no wonder that disgraced British ENCODE leader Ewan Birney became the
most vociferous critic of that WSJ article.

![Dr_Ewan_Birney_FRS](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2015/10
/Dr_Ewan_Birney_FRS-200x300.jpg)

![Capture2](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/10/Capture21-300x53.png)

![Capture1](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/10/Capture11-300x101.png)[

Birney is the best example of massive waste due to publicly funded research.
The ['controversy' section of ENCODE
project](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ENCODE#Controversy) at wikipedia is now
bigger than the achievement section.

> The project has also been criticized for its high cost (~$400 million in
total) and favoring big science which takes money away from highly productive
investigator-initiated research.[36] The pilot ENCODE project cost an
estimated $55 million; the scale-up was about $130 million and the US National
Human Genome Research Institute NHGRI could award up to $123 million for the
next phase. Some researchers argue that a solid return on that investment has
yet to be seen. There have been attempts to scour the literature for the
papers in which ENCODE plays a significant part and since 2012 there have been
300 papers, 110 of which come from labs without ENCODE funding. An additional
problem is that ENCODE is not a unique name dedicated to the ENCODE project
exclusively, so the word 'encode' comes up in many genetics and genomics
literature.[6]

The 'achievements' are properly summarized in Dan Graur's ["On the immortality
of television sets: function in the human genome according to the evolution-
free gospel of
ENCODE"](http://gbe.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2013/02/20/gbe.evt028)).
After Graur published his paper, Birney's friends such as Mick Watson,
ridiculed Graur in social media, whereas his friends in Nature and Science
published a number of critical articles without any substance. Then it all
disappeared and truth won. Birney and Mick Watson responded childishly by
blocking Graur on twitter.

What would have happened, if Birney tried something similar to ENCODE as a
researcher at a private company and got caught? For example, what if he
misreported about the effectiveness of a drug as 80% by redefining
'effectiveness'? The company would not have had any option but to fire him.
Instead under government management, he got promoted. Government funding is
based on connections, not merit. For example, you can see the excitement of
Eric Green , the corrupt head of government agency NHGRI, after Birney's
promotion in the following video.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/08pYfJDTqUw" frameborder="0"> </iframe>

Another aspect of publicly funded research - Dan Graur lost all his NIH
funding after speaking the truth about ENCODE.

[Eric Green, Funding, Authorship, Integrity, and an Answer to
@phylogenomics](http://judgestarling.tumblr.com/post/97259387131/eric-green-
funding-authorship-integrity-and-an)

> Eric Green is an author on many ENCODE papers, including the 2012 idiotic
article in Nature, and of the many press releases which proclaimed that junk
DNA does not exist.

Dan Graur has publicly described Eric Green and his ilk as badly trained
technicians.

Dan Graurs previous main source of research money was NIH.

It isnt anymore.

So, given these facts, my null hypothesis is that Eric Green is to academic
integrity what O. J. Simpson is to marital bliss. As with all scientific
hypotheses, Ill wait for this one to be refuted. Should I hold my breath?

Case closed.

