---
title: Top Ten Genomes - (v) Ich
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
The macronuclear genome of parasite Ichthyophthirius multifiliis was
[published in 2011](http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/10/r100).
<!--more-->

> Background

Ichthyophthirius multifiliis, commonly known as Ich, is a highly pathogenic
ciliate responsible for 'white spot', a disease causing significant economic
losses to the global aquaculture industry. Options for disease control are
extremely limited, and Ich's obligate parasitic lifestyle makes experimental
studies challenging. Unlike most well-studied protozoan parasites, Ich belongs
to a phylum composed primarily of free-living members. Indeed, it is closely
related to the model organism Tetrahymena thermophila. Genomic studies
represent a promising strategy to reduce the impact of this disease and to
understand the evolutionary transition to parasitism.

Results

We report the sequencing, assembly and annotation of the Ich macronuclear
genome. Compared with its free-living relative T. thermophila, the Ich genome
is reduced approximately two-fold in length and gene density and three-fold in
gene content. We analyzed in detail several gene classes with diverse
functions in behavior, cellular function and host immunogenicity, including
protein kinases, membrane transporters, proteases, surface antigens and
cytoskeletal components and regulators. We also mapped by orthology Ich's
metabolic pathways in comparison with other ciliates and a potential host
organism, the zebrafish Danio rerio.

Conclusions

Knowledge of the complete protein-coding and metabolic potential of Ich opens
avenues for rational testing of therapeutic drugs that target functions
essential to this parasite but not to its fish hosts. Also, a catalog of
surface protein-encoding genes will facilitate development of more effective
vaccines. The potential to use T. thermophila as a surrogate model offers
promise toward controlling 'white spot' disease and understanding the
adaptation to a parasitic lifestyle.

It deserves a place among unusual genomes for being extremely AT-rich (15%).
In fact, it holds the record for being the most AT-rich genome sequenced so
far. Previously this record was held by malaria parasite Plasmodium.

![gb-2011-12-10-r100-2](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/05/gb-2011-12-10-r100-2-153x300.jpg)

What do the extremely AT-rich and GC-rich genomes tell us about the functional
properties of the organism? Very little as it turns out. There are no
consistent patterns of the GC-content of genomes of eukaryotic species, and at
times closely related species have wide divergence in genomic GC-content.
Check various types of mosquitoes for example. Among the patterns we have
seen, several ciliates seem to have AT-rich genomes. Ciliate genomes are also
weird in another way, and that topic (MIC and MAC) will be covered separately
as a different top ten category.

