---
title: 'Matthew Cunningham-Cook: How the TPP Will Create a Medical Privacy Hellscape'
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
**By Matthew Cunningham-Cook, who has written for the International Business Times, The New Republic, Jacobin, Aljazeera, and The Nation and has been a labor activist**
<!--more-->

On October 6, the European Court of Justice issued a sweeping ruling
invalidating the existing cross-Atlantic data transfer agreement, putting the
entire business model of companies like Facebook and Google at risk. The
ruling gives data privacy regulators in individual EU states expansive powers
to demand data localization from multinational tech firms. Observers noted
that the Snowden revelations contributed to the decision, with EU judges
looking unfavorable at the fact that the NSA had basically unfettered access
to the data of EU citizens.

Lo and behold, just a month later comes a trade agreement that will make sure
that Facebook and Googles little legal problems in Europe wont happen in. say,
Australia, Japan, New Zealand or Canada.

To wit, from the TPPs electronic commerce chapter:

> Each Party shall allow the cross-border transfer of information by
electronic means, including personal information, when this activity is for
the conduct of the business of a covered person.

Public Citizen as always had a good rundown, right after the TPPs release. The
E-Commerce chapter has serious implications for online privacy, said Peter
Maybarduk, director of Public Citizens information society program. The text
reveals that policies protecting personal data when it crosses borders could
be subject to challenge as a violation of the TPP.

The Public Citizen press release also points out that These TPP standards
replicate language in World Trade Organization agreements under which
tribunals have ruled against domestic policies in 43 of 44 challenges.

But beyond the E-commerce chapters impact on Facebook and Google, which has
been discussed, Im interested in how there is no carveout for medical data.
The TPP language means that insurers and other companies can take medical data
across borders willy-nilly without any type of fear of running into pesky data
privacy lawslike, say HIPAA, which protects personal health information from
misuse.

This is particularly interesting in the case of Vietnam. A memo from the
international law firm Russin and Vecchi states that:

> Notwithstanding the existence of some privacy regulations that relate to
healthcare services, certain gaps remain. Is a healthcare entity liable for a
breach of a patients privacy by a doctor or medical worker employed by that
entity? If yes, to what extent is the healthcare entity liable? May private
information about a patient be stored, used and transferred within a
healthcare entity and, if so, to what extent? Who may have access to a patient
or his private information during a medical examination and/or treatment?

Basically a legal wild west for data, now in the TPP zone, being advertised as
a great place for more IT offshoring.

Its unfortunately widely acceptedeven in the EUthat companies like Facebook
and Google consider consumer data a commodity to be bought and sold. There is
little variance across the world as to this fact. But medical data is a whole
other area entirely, with a range of laws protecting medical privacy across
the TPP zone. But what happens when medical data is transferred to another
country? The EUs Directive on Data Protection explicitly prohibits the
offshoring of EU citizen data to countries with lower security standards. But
HIPAA has none of the same protectionsan overhaul of HIPAA to make its
protections stronger could be prevented by TPP rules.

The Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human Services already
found data protections sorely lacking in 2014, when it wrote: For example,
Medicaid agencies or domestic contractors who send [personal health
information] offshore may have limited means of enforcing provisions of BAAs
[business associate agreements] that are intended to safeguard PHI. Although
some countries may have privacy protections greater than those in the United
States, other countries may have limited or no privacy protections to support
HIPAA compliance.

So the short of it is this: medical data protection in the US is already poor
compared to the EU, and TPP could preempt any effort to strengthen
protectionssending any changes directly to an investor-state tribunal, where
it is more likely than not to be overturned.

Yet another reason to oppose this truly awful, anti-people deal.

