---
title: Environmental Destruction, 'Green Energy' Scams and Nature-like Technologies
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Human damage to environment is real, and one of the best examples is the
following story from Bloomberg -
<!--more-->

[Saudi Wells Running Dry of Water Spell End of Desert
Wheat](http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-11-04/saudi-wells-running-
dry-of-water-spell-end-of-desert-wheat)

![-1x-1](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/12/1x-1-300x162.png)

> For decades, only a few features punctuated the vastness of the Saudi
desert: oil wells, oases -- and wheat fields.

Despite torrid weather and virtually no rain, the worlds largest oil producer
once grew so much of the grain that its exports could feed Kuwait, United Arab
Emirates, Qatar, Bahrain, Oman and Yemen. The circular wheat farms, half a
mile across with a central sprinkler system, spread across the desert in the
1980s and 1990s, visible in spring to anyone overflying the Arabian peninsula
as green spots amid a dun sea of sand.

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/Capture-
300x204.jpg)

![Capture2](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/12/Capture2-300x180.jpg)

To summarize, Saudis had an aquifer with water filled over centuries, and they
pumped all water out to grow wheat in the desert. As a result, they now have
nine times as many people as in 1960, but the aquifer is gone. Countries they
were feeding also have huge populations and it is an utterly unsustainable
situation.

\-----------------------------------------------------------

That does not mean 'green energy' and various government-funded 'green'
projects are the solutions. In another fascinating story, acting-man blog
wrote about Spain's 'green energy' scam and recent collapse of government-
subsidized Abengoa leading to the largest bankruptcy in Spain.

[Giant Green Energy Boondoggle Flops in Spain](http://www.acting-
man.com/?p=41628)

> People often forget that it actually costs energy to produce solar panels.
Whether they will in turn produce enough energy during their lifetime to make
this investment viable remains questionable. It remains questionable precisely
because so many companies in the sector depend both directly and indirectly on
a vast variety of government subsidies (including the introduction of inane
trade barriers to the detriment of consumers).

With the subsidization scam in Spain reaching its limit, it turns out that not
even sunny climes can keep solar boondoggles afloat. In the current case, a
cool $29 billion (27.3 bn.) in liabilities have just been exposed to intense
vaporization danger, as green energy company Abengoa has finally filed for
bankruptcy.

It is the by far biggest bankruptcy in Spains history. 24,000 employees will
have to look for a new job. The sovereign wealth fund of oil junkie Norway
holds 2.7% of the companys shares, an investment it will now have to write
off. More than 200 banks are creditors of Abengoa, with total exposure of 20.2
billion. Abengoas business activities are described as renewable electricity
generation, converting biomass into biofuel and desalination of seawater
practically a whats what list of businesses that cannot possibly survive
without subsidies.

Abengoa incidentally provides an excellent illustration of Austrian Business
Cycle Theory, as more than 20 giant ongoing construction projects the company
has initiated will remain incomplete. These empty shells are testament to the
fact that there is a big difference between money and real capital. Banks and
investors had no problem providing the company with money (much of it created
from thin air), lending it huge sums. But the economys pool of real funding
has proved unable to support the companys investments.

\-----------------------------------------------------------

An alternative approach has been proposed by Russian president Putin [in his
recent UN speech](http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/50385).

> Ladies and gentlemen, one more issue that shall affect the future of the
entire humankind is climate change. It is in our interest to ensure that the
coming UN Climate Change Conference that will take place in Paris in December
this year should deliver some feasible results. As part of our national
contribution, we plan to limit greenhouse gas emissions to 7075 percent of the
1990 levels by the year 2030.

However, I suggest that we take a broader look at the issue. Admittedly, we
may be able to defuse it for a while by introducing emission quotas and using
other tactical measures, but we certainly will not solve it for good that way.
**What we need is an essentially different approach, one that would involve
introducing new, groundbreaking, nature-like technologies that would not
damage the environment, but rather work in harmony with it, enabling us to
restore the balance between the biosphere and technology upset by human
activities.**

What is 'nature-like technology'? Cluborlov blog expanded on the idea [here
](http://cluborlov.blogspot.com/2015/10/shrinking-technosphere-part-i.html)and
[here](http://cluborlov.blogspot.com/2015/10/shrinking-technosphere-part-
iv.html).

> I hadn't heard the phrase implementing naturelike technologies before, so I
Googled it and Yandexed it, and came up with nothing more than Putin's speech
at the UN. He coined the phrase. As with the other phrases he's coined, such
as sovereign democracy and dictatorship of the law, it is a game-changer. With
him, these aren't words thrown on the wind. In each of these cases, the phrase
laid the foundation of a new philosophy of governance, complete with a new set
of policies.

In the case of sovereign democracy, it meant methodically excluding all
foreign influences on Russia's political system, a process that culminated
recently when Russia, in tandem with China, banned Western NGOs, which were
previously making futile attempts to destabilize Russia and China politically.
Other countries that find themselves having trouble with the Orange Revolution
Syndicate can now follow their best practices.

> But before we get too far, let us look at where we are going. What is
naturelike? Some readers proposed biomimetics, which is a newfangled
rebranding of the old process of looking at nature in search of promising
mechanisms: airplanes have wings like birds; scuba divers and snorkelers wear
fins like fish; chairs and tables have legs, walls have ears and so on. It all
started a few million years ago when some hominid picked up a pointy rock and
called it a claw or a fang. No, that's not it at all.

Other readers chimed in to say that perhaps this is about permaculture. Now,
permaculture is actually quite interesting. The term spans the range from
general design principles to specific ways of dealing with the landscape,
specifically to grow food. Most of the technology this involves is
nonindustrial, and is thought-heavy rather than energy-heavy, which is a good
combination. Permaculture probably has a role to play, if a way can be found
to teach it to people who are too busy simply surviving to attend pricey
courses in exotic locales.

To be naturelike, technologies must restore the balance between the biosphere
and the technosphere (as Putin put it at the UN). Why is this necessary? Well,
human populations that fail to do so exhibit a marked tendency to go extinct.
This is something that has happened quite a lot. The Greenland Norse are often
held up as a particularly stark example of such failure: they settled
Greenland during a relatively short climatic period when it was green rather
than white, and when it anticlimactically reverted to a barren wasteland they
died out. This was unnecessary: they were survived by the native tribes, which
continued to fish and hunt on the ice. But the Norse wanted to eat pork and
beef, refusing to go native, for such was their culture and sense of identity.

Cultural change, of the sort that was expected of the Greenland Norse were
they to survive, is very difficult. It does occur, but on its own it tends to
proceed far too slowly to make a difference in a crisis. Changes that force
people to change their lifestyles in ways that contradict their physical
habits and their sense of identity are particularly difficult, and are often
met with resentment or hostility.

For example, it would make perfect sense to introduce a few small changes in
the US that would serve to substantially lessen the impact on the environment.
Here are three simple examples:

1\. Ban lawns. Grass can only be mowed once it has gone to seed and must be
used to make hay.

2\. Ban beef and pork. No more hamburgersrabbitburgers! Everyone eats locally
raised, grass-fed rabbits.

3\. Mandate hitchhiking. If there is a free seat, you must stop for
hitchhikers, or face a steep fine.

Of course, people would be up in arms about such measures. They would feel
that their rights are being violated and their culture destroyed. This brings
up another small but important measure:

4\. Confiscate all the arms.

Note, however, that people are not the least bit up in arms about the
following quite successful initiatives:

1\. Force people to constantly mow their lawns, damaging their health with the
very considerable air pollution from the dirty two-stroke lawn mowers, water
pollution from runoff of chemical fertilizers and exposure to toxic herbicides
such as Monsanto's carcinogenic glyphosphate (Roundup).

2\. Force people to eat factory-farmed beef and pork, which is laced with
growth hormones, antibiotics and other chemicals, by depriving them of any
other affordable source of animal protein. Also, be sure to lace all their
food and drink with high-fructose corn syrup and artificial sweeteners, so
that they get as fat as pigs and can't walk any great distance, but have to
drive everywhere.

3\. Force everybody to own their own car in order to be able to get around,
even though most cars sit idle most of the time, and even though there is
plenty of unemployed people who would be only too happy to give them lifts for
a tiny fraction of what it costs to own, insure and operate a car.

These measures create a social environment that is so alienated, riddled with
hostility and unhealthy that nobody feels particularly safe within it. This
brings up another small but important measure:

4\. Force everyone to think that they need to own a firearm (or two or three)
in order to keep themselves and their families safe; then step back and watch
the fireworks. Arrest those who run afoul of the many contradictory firearms
laws, and sell them as slaves to private prisonswhile everyone cheers, because
they have been told that this makes them safer.

What is the difference between these two sets of initiatives? Both seem like
they should be quite unpopular. The first set would be beneficial, in terms of
its impact on both public health and the environment, while the second is
manifestly harmful. But the first is politically a nonstarter, while the
second sells rather well.

