---
title: Only three driver gene mutations are required for the development of lung and
  colorectal cancers
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Tomasetti, Vogelstein and co-authors recently published [another informative
paper](http://www.pnas.org/content/112/1/118.abstract) on somatic mutations
and cancer, but it got lost due to cacophony related to their Science paper.
This paper has a lot more details on their mathematical model.
<!--more-->

> Cancer arises through the sequential accumulation of mutations in oncogenes
and tumor suppressor genes. However, how many such mutations are required for
a normal human cell to progress to an advanced cancer? The best estimates for
this number have been provided by mathematical models based on the relation
between age and incidence. For example, the classic studies of Nordling
[Nordling CO (1953) Br J Cancer 7(1):6872] and Armitage and Doll [Armitage P,
Doll R (1954) Br J Cancer 8(1):112] suggest that six or seven sequential
mutations are required. Here, we describe a different approach to derive this
estimate that combines conventional epidemiologic studies with genome-wide
sequencing data: incidence data for different groups of patients with the same
cancer type were compared with respect to their somatic mutation rates. In two
well-documented cancer types (lung and colon adenocarcinomas), we find that
only three sequential mutations are required to develop cancer. This
conclusion deepens our understanding of the process of carcinogenesis and has
important implications for the design of future cancer genome-sequencing
efforts.

Speaking of criticism about the Science paper, the biggest part of nonsense
comes from Yaniv Erlich, a poorly trained technician at Broad Institute, who
keeps harping on their use of log-log distribution. Folks, log-log
distribution has been used in cancer literature related to somatic mutations
since the 1950s, such as these two classic papers - [A New Theory on the
Cancer-inducing Mechanism - C. O.
Nordling](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2007872/?page=3) and
[The Age Distribution of Cancer and a Multi-stage Theory of Carcinogenesis -
P. Armitage and R.
Doll](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2007940/?page=3). Everyone
knows that it represents y=x^a type of mathematical relationship, including
Nordling, who mentioned in his paper and Tomasetti et al., who reproduced the
math of Armitage and Doll in their PNAS paper.

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/01/Capture19-300x297.png)

We believe Yaniv Erlich should stick to showing his ignorance on read
coherence rather than diversifying into many different areas.

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/01/Capture18-300x240.png)

