---
title: Occasionality or Probability - What is the Right Term?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
The concept of probability comes from mathematics and it has rigorous
mathematical definition. It is a measure of [distribution of outcomes of
**truly independent trials**](http://ecodevoevo.blogspot.in/2015/02
/occasionality-vs-probability.html). Wikipedia [describes it
as](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Probability#Interpretations) \-
<!--more-->

> When dealing with experiments that are random and **well-defined** in a
purely theoretical setting (like tossing a fair coin), probabilities can be
numerically described by the statistical number of outcomes considered
favorable divided by the total number of all outcomes (tossing a fair coin
twice will yield head-head with probability 1/4, because the four outcomes
head-head, head-tails, tails-head and tails-tails are equally likely to
occur).

Do you see the emphasis on 'truly independent' or 'well-defined'? Consider
tossing a coin for example. Based on our understanding of physical laws
governing its motion, it can be said that the motion is well-defined and each
outcome is truly independent. The concept of probability is used extensively
in theoretical physics (e.g. wave function as 'probability amplitude' in
quantum mechanics, or distribution of gas atoms or atoms on vibrating springs
in statistical physics to derive the concept of temperature), but the
physicists always had to qualify their assumption of truly independent by
further experimental confirmation. The probabilistic theory of quantum
mechanics confused even heavyweights like Einstein, but nobody managed to come
up with an experiment to prove it wrong.

When it comes to genetics, we are increasingly seeing the use of the term
'probability' to describe experiments, which are far from well-defined. This
is not only confusing, but also harmful when being applied in medical context.
Professor Ken Weiss [wrote an excellent blog
post](http://ecodevoevo.blogspot.in/2015/02/occasionality-vs-probability.html)
to argue that use of the term 'probability' in genetics should be replaced
with 'occasionality' to make sure people understand that that they are dealing
with a different beast altogether.

> **Occasionality:** **a more appropriate alternative concept--where there's
no oh!**

When many factors contribute to some measured event, and these are either not
all known or measured, or in non-repeatable combinations, or not all always
present, so that each instance of the event is due to unique context-dependent
combination, we can say that it is an occasional result. In the usual
parlance, the event occasionally happens and each time the conditions may or
may not be similar. This is occasionality rather than probability, and there
may not be any 'o-value' that we can assign to the event.

This is, in fact, what we see. Of course, regular processes occur all around
us, and our event will involve some regular processes, just not in a way to
which probability values can be assigned. That is, the occasionality of an
event is not an invocation of mystic or immaterial causation. The word merely
indicates that instances of the event are individually unique to an extent not
appropriately measured, or not measured with knowable accuracy or
approximation, by probabilistic statistical (or tractable deterministic)
approaches. The assumption that the observations reflect an underlying
repeated or repeatable process is inaccurate to an extent as to undermine the
idea of estimation and prediction upon which statistical and probabilistic
concepts are based. The extent of that inaccuracy is itself unknown or even
unknowable.

There are clearly genetic causal events that are identifiable and, while
imperfect because of measurement noise and other unmeasured factors,
sufficiently repeatable for practical understanding in the usual way and even
treated with standard probability concepts. Some variants in the CFTR gene and
cystic fibrosis fall into that category. Enough is known of the function of
the gene and hence of the causal mechanism of the known allele that screening
or interventions need not take into account other contextual factors that may
contribute to pathogenesis but in dismissible minor ways. But this seems to be
the exception rather than the rule. Based on present knowledge, I would
suggest that that rule is occasionality.

There is another problem that he does not mention, and we discussed it in [A
Sequel to Heng Lis Mysterious New
Program](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/02/18/a-sequel-to-heng-lis-
mysterious-new-program/), but say here again.

In the current trend of bioinformatics, the theoretical researchers are
resorting to being 'tools provider', and then the experimentalists are using
those 'benchmarked tools' to analyze experimental data. That creates distance
between those who are developing 'software tools' (note - not theoretical
models) and those who are interpreting data. If the tool generates a
'p-value', then the p-value becomes scientific truth. Moreover, the science
becomes diluted, because tools do not leave much room for discussions about
fundamental principles. Try to argue with your computer program and see who
wins :)

