---
title: Let's Discuss - Is it Time to Shut Down NHGRI?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Professor [Ken Weiss](http://ecodevoevo.blogspot.com/) once proposed that the
money allocated for NHGRI, the human genome research division of NIH, should
be given to NSF and be spent on basic research on genomes. I think that is a
very good idea, because there is nothing unusual in human genome that is not
found in other genomes. Some parts of the human genome (information processing
blocks) are conserved all the way to bacterial genomes. Some other parts came
in after the origin of eukaryotes. Many developmental genes are conserved in
almost all multicellular eukaryotes and definitely vertebrates. Ciliary genes
are conserved all the way to chlamy.
<!--more-->

Moreover, spending money to study only the human genome has the bad effect of
making worthless 'discoveries' not consistent with evolutionary principles. In
the ENCODE fiasco, a large group of researchers got large amount of money from
NHGRI to show that human genome was unusual and they ended up 'proving' 80%
functionality of human genome !!

[On the immortality of television sets: "function" in the human genome
according to the evolution-free gospel of
ENCODE](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23431001)

> A recent slew of ENCyclopedia Of DNA Elements (ENCODE) Consortium
publications, specifically the article signed by all Consortium members, put
forward the idea that more than 80% of the human genome is functional. This
claim flies in the face of current estimates according to which the fraction
of the genome that is evolutionarily conserved through purifying selection is
less than 10%. Thus, according to the ENCODE Consortium, a biological function
can be maintained indefinitely without selection, which implies that at least
80 - 10 = 70% of the genome is perfectly invulnerable to deleterious
mutations, either because no mutation can ever occur in these "functional"
regions or because no mutation in these regions can ever be deleterious. This
absurd conclusion was reached through various means, chiefly by employing the
seldom used "causal role" definition of biological function and then applying
it inconsistently to different biochemical properties, by committing a logical
fallacy known as "affirming the consequent," by failing to appreciate the
crucial difference between "junk DNA" and "garbage DNA," by using analytical
methods that yield biased errors and inflate estimates of functionality, by
favoring statistical sensitivity over specificity, and by emphasizing
statistical significance rather than the magnitude of the effect. Here, we
detail the many logical and methodological transgressions involved in
assigning functionality to almost every nucleotide in the human genome. The
ENCODE results were predicted by one of its authors to necessitate the
rewriting of textbooks. We agree, many textbooks dealing with marketing, mass-
media hype, and public relations may well have to be rewritten.

Not that NHGRI learned anything from that exercise, because it appears to find
new ways to waste money. Here they are on to a 'new' problem solved decades
ago. From the recent NIH press release -

[NIH grants aim to decipher the language of gene
regulation](http://www.nih.gov/news/health/jan2015/nhgri-05.htm)

> The National Institutes of Health has awarded grants of more than $28
million aimed at deciphering the language of how and when genes are turned on
and off. These awards emanate from the recently launched Genomics of Gene
Regulation (GGR) program of the National Human Genome Research Institute
(NHGRI), part of NIH.

The GGR program aims to develop new ways for understanding how the genes and
switches in the genome fit together as networks.

There is a growing realization that the ways genes are regulated to work
together can be important for understanding disease, said Mike Pazin, Ph.D., a
program director in the Functional Analysis Program in NHGRIs Division of
Genome Sciences.

You gotta be kidding !!

Yes, there is network involved, but it is a different kind of network. Who is
Mike Pazin?

![pazinm](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/pazinm.jpg)

From the [NIH website](http://www.genome.gov/27545735) \-

> Dr. Pazin joined the National Human Genome Research Institute's NHGRI's
Extramural Research Program in 2011. Mike is part of the NHGRI team overseeing
the ENCODE project, generating an Encyclopedia of DNA Elements from the human
genome, and the modENCODE project, identifying functional elements in the fly
and worm genomes. He manages a portfolio of grants in functional genomics. He
is also a member of the NHGRI Data Access Committee.

He is an ENCODE guy.

...and who does he give money to? Surprise, surprise - ENCODE leader Mike
Snyder, who was the main author of their discredited paper, gets the biggest
award to 'decipher the language of gene regulation'.

![Snyder_Michael](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/01/Snyder_Michael.jpg)

>

Stanford University, Stanford, California, $7.1 million

Principal Investigator: Michael Snyder, Ph.D.

Dr. Snyder and his team will study the development of one type of skin cell
(keratinocyte) as it develops from an early stage skin cell into a mature
cell. To do this, they will examine the network of genes and pathways that
control this developmental change. The results may ultimately have
implications for better understanding skin biology and hundreds of skin
disorders.

At this point, shutting down NHGRI and transferring funds to NSF will be the
only way to end this endless waste of taxpayers' money.

\--------------------------------------------

Also check -

[Eric Green, Funding, Authorship, Integrity, and an Answer to
@phylogenomics](http://judgestarling.tumblr.com/post/97259387131/eric-green-
funding-authorship-integrity-and-an)

> Eric Green is the Director of the National Human Genome Research Institute
at NIH.

The National Human Genome Research Institute and other institutes at NIH
provide the bulk of the hundreds of millions of dollars for the ENCODE Project
and other Big Science obscenities, such as modENCODE.

Eric Green is an author on many ENCODE papers, including the 2012 idiotic
article in Nature, and of the many press releases which proclaimed that junk
DNA does not exist.

Dan Graur has publicly described Eric Green and his ilk as badly trained
technicians.

Dan Graurs previous main source of research money was NIH.

It isnt anymore.

[NIH Director Francis Collins ridiculous We would have had an Ebola vaccine if
the NIH were fully funded meme](http://www.michaeleisen.org/blog/?p=1638)

> But what really bothers me the most about this is that, rather than trying
to exploit the current hysteria about Ebola by offering a quid-pro-quo Give me
more money and Ill deliver and Ebola vaccine, Collins should be out there
pointing out that the reason were even in a position to develop an Ebola
vaccine is because of our long-standing investment in basic research, and that
the real threat we face is not Ebola, but the fact that, by having slashed the
NIH budget and made it increasingly difficult to have a stable career in
science, were making it less and less likely that well be equipped to handle
all of the future challenges to public health that were going to be face in
the future.

Dont get me wrong. I get what Collins is trying to do. I just think its a huge
mistake. Every time I see testimony from NIH officials to Congress, they are
engaged in this kind of pandering talking about how concerned they are about
[insert pet disease of person asking question] or that and how, if only they
could get more money, wed be able to take make amazing progress. But guess
what? It hasnt worked. The NIH budget is still being slashed. Its time for the
people who run the biomedical research enterprise in this country to make
basic research the center of their pitch for funding. Collins had a huge
opportunity to do that here, but he blew it.

\--------------------------------

**2016 update**

A New Yorker article by Sid Mukherjee on epigenetics got widespread criticisms
from well-known scientists.

[Epigenetics Debacle - Do You Feel Sad for Sid
Mukherjee?](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2016/05/06/epigenetics-debacle-
do-you-feel-sad-for-sid-mukherjee/)

The condemnations are indirect criticisms of NHGRI given that the topics
discussed in Mukherjee's article came from bad science sponsored and promoted
by the same government agency

