---
title: Most lncRNAs are Junk and lncRNA Papers are Hype
categories:
- ncRNA
---
A new paper titled '[Non-coding RNA: what is functional and what is junk?](htt
p://journal.frontiersin.org/Journal/10.3389/fgene.2015.00002/abstract)' came
out recently, reviewing all spectacular claims about mammalian genome being
filled with long noncoding RNAs (h/t: @tryangregory). The last sentence of the
abstract summarizes it all -
<!--more-->

"Importantly, we advocate that in the absence of any such data, the
appropriate null hypothesis is that the RNA in question is junk."

Here is the full abstract -

> The genomes of large multicellular eukaryotes are mostly comprised of non-
protein coding DNA. Although there has been much agreement that a small
fraction of these genomes has important biological functions, there has been
much debate as to whether the rest contributes to development and/or
homeostasis. Much of the speculation has centered on the genomic regions that
are transcribed into RNA at some low level. Unfortunately these RNAs have been
arbitrarily assigned various names, such as intergenic RNA, long non-coding
RNAs, etc., which have led to some confusion in the field. Many researchers
believe that these transcripts represent a vast, unchartered world of
functional non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs), simply because they exist. However, there
are reasons to question this Panglossian view because it ignores our current
understanding of how evolution shapes eukaryotic genomes and how the gene
expression machinery works in eukaryotic cells. Although there are undoubtedly
many more functional ncRNAs yet to be discovered and characterized, it is also
likely that many of these transcripts are simply junk. Here we discuss how to
determine whether any given ncRNA has a function. Importantly, we advocate
that in the absence of any such data, the appropriate null hypothesis is that
the RNA in question is junk.

The paper is well worth reading, but if you are too busy with ENCODE committee
meetings, [Dan Graur is here to
help](http://judgestarling.tumblr.com/post/102457412896/do-long-noncoding-
rnas-defy-evolutionary) \-

> So, listen badly trained technicians, especially those working with lncRNA.
To prove that your sequence is functional in a meaningful evolutionary manner,
you have show that the sequence is either maintained by purifying selection or
by positive selection (or some other type of selection). You cannot base your
claims of functionality on performance of a certain biochemical reaction. It
is the same with shoes; the binding of chewing gum to shoe soles does not
prove that this is the function of shoes.

![](http://media.tumblr.com/3d93bf6bc42000f0f9a124933c1b5157/tumblr_inline_nex
rmdu3851rjbtdg.jpg)

**The function of very expensive shoes is NOT to bind chewing gum**

