---
title: 'The Chastity of Amoebae: Re-evaluating Evidence for Sex in Amoeboid Organisms'
categories:
- ncRNA
---
[The chastity of amoebae: re-evaluating evidence for sex in amoeboid
organisms](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21429931)
<!--more-->

> Amoebae are generally assumed to be asexual. We argue that this view is a
relict of early classification schemes that lumped all amoebae together inside
the 'lower' protozoa, separated from the 'higher' plants, animals and fungi.
This artificial classification allowed microbial eukaryotes, including
amoebae, to be dismissed as primitive, and implied that the biological rules
and theories developed for macro-organisms need not apply to microbes.
Eukaryotic diversity is made up of 70+ lineages, most of which are microbial.
Plants, animals and fungi are nested among these microbial lineages. Thus,
theories on the prevalence and maintenance of sex developed for macro-
organisms should in fact apply to microbial eukaryotes, though the theories
may need to be refined and generalized (e.g. to account for the variation in
sexual strategies and prevalence of facultative sex in natural populations of
many microbial eukaryotes). We use a revised phylogenetic framework to assess
evidence for sex in several amoeboid lineages that are traditionally
considered asexual, and we interpret this evidence in light of theories on the
evolution of sex developed for macro-organisms. We emphasize that the limited
data available for many lineages coupled with natural variation in microbial
life cycles overestimate the extent of asexuality. Mapping sexuality onto the
eukaryotic tree of life demonstrates that the majority of amoeboid lineages
are, contrary to popular belief, anciently sexual, and that most asexual
groups have probably arisen recently and independently. Additionally, several
unusual genomic traits are prevalent in amoeboid lineages, including cyclic
polyploidy, which may serve as alternative mechanisms to minimize the
deleterious effects of asexuality.

