---
title: Vitamin A and Lung Regeneration
categories:
- ncRNA
---
[Is a regenerative approach viable for the treatment of
COPD?](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3085872/)
<!--more-->

> Degenerative lung diseases such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) are common with huge worldwide morbidity. Anti-inflammatory drug
development strategies have proved disappointing and current treatment is
aimed at symptomatic relief. Only lung transplantation with all its attendant
difficulties offers hope of cure and the outlook for affected patients is
bleak. Lung regeneration therapies aim to reverse the structural and
functional deficits in COPD either by delivery of exogenous lung cells to
replace lost tissue, delivery of exogenous stem cells to induce a local
paracrine effect probably through an anti-inflammatory action or by the
administration of small molecules to stimulate the endogenous regenerative
ability of lung cells. In animal models of emphysema and disrupted alveolar
development each of these strategies has shown some success but there are
potential tumour-inducing dangers with a cellular approach. Small molecules
such as all-trans retinoic acid have been successful in animal models although
the mechanism is not completely understood. There are currently two Pharma-
sponsored trials in progress concerning patients with COPD, one of a specific
retinoic acid receptor gamma agonist and another using mesenchymal stem cells.

From within the paper -

>

**Endogenous signalling molecules to induce lung regeneration**

This approach has roots in developmental biology using factors important in
lung development and maintenance and is exemplified by investigation into the
role of vitamin A derivatives (retinoids). Retinoids including the
biologically active molecule all-trans-RA (atRA) are essential for correct
development of a number of organs including the lung. atRA is generated from
vitamin A (retinol) through a series of reactions dependent on retinaldehyde
dehydrogenase (RALDH1-3) enzymes. The expression of these enzymes correlates
with atRA activity in vivo. atRA acts via nuclear retinoic acid receptors
(RARs), which are members of the glucocorticoid/thyroid hormone receptor
superfamily. There are three RARs (?? and ?) each of which has multiple
isoforms. RARs form heterodimers with retinoid X receptors (RXRs) that bind
atRA to form a ligand-activated transcription factor complex that regulates
downstream gene transcription. atRA and retinol are bound within the cell
complexed to cellular retinol binding proteins (CRBP1 and 2) and cellular
retinoic acid binding proteins (CRABP1 and 2). Active atRA is oxidized to
polar metabolites such as 4-oxo-RA through the CYP26 class of cytochrome P450
enzymes. Precise intracellular levels of atRA are regulated by a balance
between synthesizing and degrading enzymes (Duester, 1999). The lung is second
only to the liver as the largest store of retinoids in the body and retinoids
are stored as retinyl esters in lipid-laden fibroblasts (Okabe et al., 1984)
that are abundant in the alveolar wall often in close approximation with type
II pneumocytes. Lipid-laden fibroblasts generate biologically active atRA that
can regulate gene transcription in pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells
(Dirami et al., 2004) and atRA regulates elastin, an essential structural
component of lung matrix in perinatal fibroblasts (McGowan et al., 1997).
Levels of retinoid synthesizing enzymes RARs and retinoid-binding proteins
demonstrate dynamic patterns of regulation in whole lung during alveologenesis
in the in rat (McGowan et al., 1995) and mouse (Hind et al., 2002a,b;). In
mice mutant for RAR genes alveolar formation is disrupted: RAR? functions as a
positive regulator of alveologenesis (McGowan et al., 2000) whereas RAR? is a
negative regulator of alveologenesis (Massaro et al., 2000). atRA
supplementation during alveolar septation increases the number of alveoli but
not total surface area in normal rats and prevents the reduction in both
number of alveoli and low surface area corrected for body mass in rats treated
with dexamethasone during septation (Massaro and Massaro, 1996). These data
provided the first experimental evidence to suggest that pharmacological
regenerative therapy might be a potential approach for human diseases
characterized by too few alveoli and reduced surface area such as emphysema.

Do retinoids affect lung development in man? It appears that the answer is
yes. Mutations in the cell surface receptor for retinol STRA6 have been
identified in a screen of children born with anophthalmia (Golzio et al.,
2007; Pasutto et al., 2007). Interestingly these infants also had structural
lung defects and a failure of normal alveologenesis. Remarkably, vitamin A
supplementation during pregnancy in women in areas of endemic dietary retinoid
deficiency increases lung function in their offspring (Checkley et al., 2010).
This suggests conservation of retinoid signalling between mouse and human lung
development and demonstrates gas exchanging surface area can be manipulated by
retinoids in man.

It is therefore conceivable that the re-awakening of the retinoid signalling
pathway used in alveolar development would induce regeneration of alveoli in
the damaged lung. This is indeed the case as the administration of atRA to
elastase-induced emphysema in adult rats restored alveoli and reversed the
pathologic features of the disease (Massaro and Massaro, 1997). This
phenomenon also occurs in several other models of airspace enlargement, for
example the dexamethasone treated mouse, where mean chord length and lung
surface area were recovered after atRA administration (Hind and Maden, 2004;
Stinchcombe and Maden, 2008). Using retinoic acid receptor agonists it was
shown that the effect of atRA can be replicated by either a RAR? or a RAR?
agonist (Maden, 2006) paving the way for the current clinical trial of one of
these compounds (see the following). These positive effects of atRA have now
been replicated several times in elastase or dexamethasone models of lung
damage (Belloni et al., 2000; Massaro and Massaro, 2000; Tepper et al., 2000;
Ishizawa et al., 2004; Garber et al., 2006; Perl & Gale, 2009); in the tight
skin mouse mutant (Massaro and Massaro, 2000); in pneumonectomized lungs (Kaza
et al., 2001) and it protects from 02 induced damage (Veness-Meehan et al.,
2000, 2002; Ozer et al., 2005).

Also check -

[Maternal vitamin A supplementation and lung function in
offspring](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20463338)

> BACKGROUND:

Vitamin A is important in regulating early lung development and alveolar
formation. Maternal vitamin A status may be an important determinant of
embryonic alveolar formation, and vitamin A deficiency in a mother during
pregnancy could have lasting adverse effects on the lung health of her
offspring. We tested this hypothesis by examining the long-term effects of
supplementation with vitamin A or beta carotene in women before, during, and
after pregnancy on the lung function of their offspring, in a population with
chronic vitamin A deficiency.

METHODS:

We examined a cohort of rural Nepali children 9 to 13 years of age whose
mothers had participated in a placebo-controlled, double-blind, cluster-
randomized trial of vitamin A or beta-carotene supplementation between 1994
and 1997.

RESULTS:

Of 1894 children who were alive at the end of the original trial, 1658 (88%)
were eligible to participate in the follow-up trial. We performed spirometry
in 1371 of the children (83% of those eligible) between October 2006 and March
2008. Children whose mothers had received vitamin A had a forced expiratory
volume in 1 second (FEV(1)) and a forced vital capacity (FVC) that were
significantly higher than those of children whose mothers had received placebo
(FEV(1), 46 ml higher with vitamin A; 95% confidence interval [CI], 6 to 86;
FVC, 46 ml higher with vitamin A; 95% CI, 8 to 84), after adjustment for
height, age, sex, body-mass index, calendar month, caste, and individual
spirometer used. Children whose mothers had received beta carotene had
adjusted FEV(1) and FVC values that were similar to those of children whose
mothers had received placebo (FEV(1), 14 ml higher with beta carotene; 95% CI,
-24 to 54; FVC, 17 ml higher with beta carotene, 95% CI, -21 to 55).

CONCLUSIONS:

In a chronically undernourished population, maternal repletion with vitamin A
at recommended dietary levels before, during, and after pregnancy improved
lung function in offspring. This public health benefit was apparent in the
preadolescent years.

