---
title: Properties of HflX, an Enigmatic Protein from Escherichia coliâ–¿
categories:
- ncRNA
---
[link](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2655521/)
<!--more-->

> The Escherichia coli gene hflX was first identified as part of the hflA
operon, mutations in which led to an increased frequency of lysogenization
upon infection of the bacterium by the temperate coliphage lambda. Independent
mutational studies have also indicated that the HflX protein has a role in
transposition. Based on the sequence of its gene, HflX is predicted to be a
GTP-binding protein, very likely a GTPase. We report here purification and
characterization of the HflX protein. We also specifically examined its
suggested functional roles mentioned above. Our results show that HflX is a
monomeric protein with a high (30% to 40%) content of helices. It exhibits
GTPase as well as ATPase activities, but it has no role in lambda lysogeny or
in transposition.

[Toward Understanding the Function of the Universally Conserved GTPase HflX
from Escherichia coli: A Kinetic
Approach](http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/bi901074h)

> Protein synthesis is a highly conserved process in all living cells
involving several members of the translation factor (TRAFAC) class of P-loop
GTPases, which play essential roles during translation. The universally
conserved GTPase HflX has previously been shown to associate with the 50S
ribosomal subunit, as well as to bind and hydrolyze both GTP and ATP. In an
effort to elucidate the cellular function of HflX, we have determined the
kinetic parameters governing the interaction between HflX and these two purine
nucleotides using fluorescence-based steady-state and pre-steady-state
techniques. On the basis of these, we demonstrate that the GTPase and ATPase
activity of HflX is stimulated by 50S and 70S ribosomal particles. However,
given cellular concentrations of the two purine nucleotides, approximately 80%
of HflX will be bound to guanine nucleotides, indicating that HflX may
function as a guanine nucleotide dependent enzyme in vivo. Using a highly
purified reconstituted in vitro translation system, we show that the GTPase
activity of HflX is also stimulated by poly(U) programmed 70S ribosomes and
that the ribosome-dependent GTPase stimulation is specifically inhibited by
the antibiotic chloramphenicol, which binds to the large ribosomal subunit,
but not by kanamycin, an aminoglycoside targeting the small ribosomal subunit.

