---
title: Wobble Modification and Human Diseases (3 old links)
categories:
- ncRNA
---
> A mitochondrial tRNA(Lys) gene mutation at nucleotide position 8344 is
responsible for the myoclonus epilepsy associated with ragged-red fibers
(MERRF) subgroup of mitochondrial encephalomyopathies. Here, we show that
normally modified uridine at the anticodon wobble position remains unmodified
in the purified mutant tRNA(Lys). We have reported a similar modification
defect at the same position in two mutant mitochondrial tRNAs(Leu)(UUR) in
another subgroup, mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis and
stroke-like episodes (MELAS), indicating this defect is common in the two
kinds of tRNA molecules with the respective mutations of the two major
mitochondrial encephalomyopathies. We therefore suggest the defect in the
anticodon is responsible, through the translational process, for the
pathogenesis of mitochondrial diseases.
<!--more-->

[Defect in modification at the anticodon wobble nucleotide of mitochondrial
tRNA(Lys) with the MERRF encephalomyopathy pathogenic
mutation](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10675533)

[Wobble modification defect in tRNA disturbs codon-anticodon interaction in a
mitochondrial disease](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11532943)

> We previously showed that in mitochondrial tRNA(Lys) with an A8344G mutation
responsible for myoclonus epilepsy associated with ragged-red fibers (MERRF),
a subgroup of mitochondrial encephalomyopathic diseases, the normally modified
wobble base (a 2-thiouridine derivative) remains unmodified. Since wobble base
modifications are essential for translational efficiency and accuracy, we used
mitochondrial components to estimate the translational activity in vitro of
purified tRNA(Lys) carrying the mutation and found no mistranslation of non-
cognate codons by the mutant tRNA, but almost complete loss of translational
activity for cognate codons. This defective translation was not explained by a
decline in aminoacylation or lowered affinity toward elongation factor Tu.
However, when direct interaction of the codon with the mutant tRNA(Lys)
defective anticodon was examined by ribosomal binding analysis, the wild-type
but not the mutant tRNA(Lys) bound to an mRNA- ribosome complex. We therefore
concluded that the anticodon base modification defect, which is forced by the
pathogenic point mutation, disturbs codon- anticodon pairing in the mutant
tRNA(Lys), leading to a severe reduction in mitochondrial translation that
eventually could result in the onset of MERRF.

[Wobble modification deficiency in mutant tRNAs in patients with mitochondrial
diseases](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15893315)

> Point mutations in mitochondrial (mt) tRNA genes are associated with a
variety of human mitochondrial diseases. We have shown previously that mt
tRNA(Leu(UUR)) with a MELAS A3243G mutation and mt tRNA(Lys) with a MERRF
A8344G mutation derived from HeLa background cybrid cells are deficient in
normal taurine-containing modifications [taum(5)(s(2))U;
5-taurinomethyl-(2-thio)uridine] at the anticodon wobble position in both
cases. The wobble modification deficiency results in defective translation. We
report here wobble modification deficiencies of mutant mt tRNAs from cybrid
cells with different nuclear backgrounds, as well as from patient tissues.
These findings demonstrate the generality of the wobble modification
deficiency in mutant tRNAs in MELAS and MERRF.

