---
title: The State of Software in Evolutionary Biology
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
[Link](http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2015/11/16/031930)
<!--more-->

> With Next Generation Sequencing Data (NGS) coming off age and being
routinely used, evolutionary biology is transforming into a data-driven
science. As a consequence, researchers have to rely on a growing number of
increasingly complex software. All widely used tools in our field have grown
considerably, in terms of the number of features as well as lines of code. In
addition, analysis pipelines now include substantially more components than
5-10 years ago. A topic that has received little attention in this context is
the code quality of widely used codes. Unfortunately, the majority of users
tend to blindly trust software and the results it produces. To this end, we
assessed the code quality of 15 highly cited tools (e.g., MrBayes, MAFFT,
SweepFinder etc.) from the broader area of evolutionary biology that are used
in current data analysis pipelines. We also discuss widely unknown problems
associated with floating point arithmetics for representing real numbers on
computer systems. Since, the software quality of the tools we analyzed is
rather mediocre, we provide a list of best practices for improving the quality
of existing tools, but also list techniques that can be deployed for
developing reliable, high quality scientific software from scratch. Finally,
we also discuss journal and science policy as well as funding issues that need
to be addressed for improving software quality as well as ensuring support for
developing new and maintaining existing software. Our intention is to raise
the awareness of the community regarding software quality issues and to
emphasize the substantial lack of funding for scientific software development.

