---
title: Chimeric Pacbio Reads and Tardigrade Controversy
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Suppose you can locate a long read in the tardigrade genome sequencing data
that has three genes from bacteriodes and three from tardigrade. Is that
convincing evidence that microbial genes got integrated into the tardigrade
genome through horizontal gene transfer?
<!--more-->

[Tardigrade debate](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/12/01/tardigrade-
mystery-solved/) brings attention to a different kind of artifact that appears
primarily in the long read world. In an informative blog post titled - ["Quick
Look at the Two Manuscripts on Tardigrade
LGT?"](http://www.igs.umaryland.edu/labs/hotopp/2015/12/05/quick-look-at-the-
two-manuscripts-on-tardigrade-lgt/), Dr. Julie Dunning Hotopp mentions the
possibility of seeing chimeric reads, where distant parts of the genome may
get joined. If the original sample has contamination, that may result in side
by side presence of microbial and eukaryotic genomic segments on some reads.

> PacBio sequencing was conducted to further support these LGTs. First, low
coverage PacBio is not a great method for LGT validation since it has steps in
library construction that makes it prone to chimeras. This is a known problem
we have published on that is not yet widely appreciated. However, LGTs that
are recovered in both the PacBio dataset and the Illumina dataset should be
real as you wouldnt expect such random events to occur repeatedly across two
platforms. One figure is shown in the manuscript that is used to demonstrate
the congruity. Congruity is expected, whether or not these are real LGTS or
not, since most of the sequence is from tardigrade. Furthermore the PacBio
assembly is <60 Mbp compared to the >200 Mbp Illumina assembly. This means
that only about a quarter of the data in the Illumina assembly is found in the
PacBio assembly. Therefore, a lot of data is missing; quite possibly these
LGTs. If that was examined more closely, I couldnt find where it was
presented. However, it does not seem to support the hypothesis.

In the meanwhile, the controversy reaches the pages of mainstream media with
'open science' claiming victory. Sometimes you have to wonder how Newton,
Maxwell or Darwin managed to get anything done in the pre-twitter world.

[Rival Scientists Cast Doubt Upon Recent Discovery About Invincible
Animals](http://www.theatlantic.com/science/archive/2015/12/rival-scientists-
kill-recent-discovery-about-invincible-animals/418755/)

> Meanwhile, Sujai Kumar from the Edinburgh team says, The entire process is a
victory for open science. His colleagues could never have done their analysis
if their rivals hadnt willingly and promptly released their data. And even
just a few years ago, they would have had nowhere to upload a manuscript
detailing the conflicting results, which other scientists could check and
discuss. It took just nine days for the second paper to follow the first.

