---
title: Evolution of  Adaptive Immune System - Two Papers we are Reading Today
categories:
- ncRNA
---
While going through [Koonin's recent
paper](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/ncrna/2015/02/26/evolution-of-adaptive-
immunity-from-transposable-elements-combined-with-innate-immune-systems/), we
came across two other relevant ones that the readers may enjoy.
<!--more-->

1\. [Evolution of Vertebrate Immunity - Thomas
Boehm](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22975003)

> All multicellular organisms protect themselves against pathogens using
sophisticated immune defenses. Functionally interconnected humoral and
cellular facilities maintain immune homeostasis in the absence of overt
infection and regulate the initiation and termination of immune responses
directed against pathogens. Immune responses of invertebrates, such as flies,
are innate and usually stereotyped; those of vertebrates, encompassing species
as diverse as jawless fish and humans, are additionally adaptive, enabling
more rapid and efficient immune reactivity upon repeated encounters with a
pathogen. Many of the attributes historically defining innate and adaptive
immunity are in fact common to both, blurring their functional distinction and
emphasizing shared ancestry and co-evolution. These findings provide
indications of the evolutionary forces underlying the origin of somatic
diversification of antigen receptors and contribute to our understanding of
the complex phenotypes of human immune disorders. Moreover, informed by
phylogenetic considerations and inspired by improved knowledge of functional
networks, new avenues emerge for innovative therapeutic strategies.

2\. [Do all creatures possess an acquired immune system of some sort? Jacob
Rimer, Irun R. Cohen and Nir
Friedman](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bies.201300124/abstract)

> Recent findings have provided evidence for the existence of non-vertebrate
acquired immunity. We survey these findings and propose that all living
organisms must express both innate and acquired immunity. This is opposed to
the paradigm that only vertebrates manifest the two forms of immune mechanism;
other species are thought to use innate immunity alone. We suggest new
definitions of innate and acquired immunity, based on whether immune
recognition molecules are encoded in the inherited genome or are generated
through somatic processes. We reason that both forms of immunity are similarly
ancient, and have co-evolved in response to lifestyle, cost-benefit tradeoffs
and symbiosis versus parasitism. However, different species have evolved
different immune solutions that are not necessarily genetically related, but
serve a similar general function, allowing individuals to learn from their own
immune experience; survival of species is contingent on the acquired immune
experience of its individuals.

