---
title: Why Do Scripting Languages Die?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Many people think scripting languages die, because they are defective. In my
opinion, they go out of fashion for being too successful.
<!--more-->

![Capture2](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/09/Capture2-300x160.png)

In 2006-2007, it seemed like PERL could do nothing wrong. There was a huge
spike in usage and Larry Wall (PERL's creator) wrote "[Programming is Hard,
Let's Go Scripting...](http://www.perl.com/pub/2007/12/06/soto-11.html)"
declaring PERL as the winner of the future.

>

**The Future**

Well, so what's the future of scripting?

In my completely unbiased opinion, that would be Perl 6. :-)

Seriously though, it's always safe to predict that the ecological landscape
will end up with many small languages and a few dominant ones. Some languages
like AppleScript have particular ecological niches and are unlikely to grow
out of them. Other languages get used outside their original niche. There will
always be the generalists, like crows and mockingbirds, and the specialists,
like penguins and dodos. (Well, maybe not always the dodos...)

Among the generalists, the conventional wisdom is that the worse-is-better
approach is more adaptive. Personally, I get a little tired of the argument:
My worse-is-better is better than your worse-is-better because I'm better at
being worser! Is it really true that the worse-is-better approach always wins?
With Perl 6 we're trying to sneak one better-is-better cycle in there and hope
to come out ahead before reverting to the tried and true worse-is-better
approach. Whether that works, only time will tell.

Fast Forward by seven years and you find -

Fast Company - [The fall of PERL, The web's most promising
language](http://www.fastcompany.com/3026446/the-fall-of-perl-the-webs-most-
promising-language).

Dr. Dobbs - [The Rise And Fall of Languages in
2013](http://www.drdobbs.com/jvm/the-rise-and-fall-of-languages-
in-2013/240165192)

Why did PERL go out of fashion? In the early years of the internet, web was
seen as a system administrator's challenge and programs like CGI scripts came
as secondary. The system-related was handled by PERL well, and that success
moved the web out of system administrators' hands. Programmers came in, and
they had no love for a language born out of AWK scripts and other system
administrator tools.

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/Capture-
300x163.png)

Which language will be hot seven years from now? Python is going strong now
(above chart), but readers may also find - "[Why are Cool Kids at Github
Moving to GO Language?](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/01/16/golang/)"
informative. Apart from GO, Javascript is another rising star, thanks to
node.js server born out of front-end (UI) programmers' desire of doing
everything with Javascript.

