---
title: Casey Dunn Reviews 'The Evolution of Animal Genomes'
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
We enjoyed reading ["The evolution of animal
genomes"](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26363125) by Casey Dunn and
Joseph Ryan. In his work, Dunn has taken a human-neutral view of animal
evolution, and thus appears to be closer to the truth. We covered his work
earlier in - [Evolutionary Biologists to Follow Sally Leys and Casey
Dunn](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/07/20/evolutionary-biologists-to-
follow-sally-leys-and-casey-dunn/).
<!--more-->

With the availability of large number of genome sequences, the scientists are
able to make comparative analysis and understand the roles of various gene
families in building organelles, tissues and organs. One of the most
surprising discoveries in those comparisons has been the lack of surprises.
Human genome did not turn out to have numerous and far more complex genes and
gene structures than supposedly less complex organisms, such as sponges.

> As animal genome sampling has improved, the results have surprised many
investigators. It was postulated that animals differ greatly in complexity,
and it was expected that gene number would be correlated with these
differences [15]. Instead, genome after genome has revealed that, while
genomes were radically transformed along the branch that gave rise to animals,
there is far less diversity within animals in terms of gene number and other
genome features than expected [5,1624,25,26]. The genomes of animals that
are sometimes erroneously referred to as higher, such as vertebrates, are
remarkably similar

to those that were characterized as lower, such as sea anemones and sponges.
This has been considered a paradox [2729], but it says far more about our
conceptions of animals and complexity than it does about the biology of the
animals themselves. It is based on biases that lead us to greatly
underestimate the intricacy of many poorly studied animals [30] and chauvinism
that leads us to overestimate vertebrate complexity [28], and presumes that
there are a small number of common types of genome changes (such as
acquisition of new protein coding genes) that underlie particular phenotypic
changes.

There are two ways out of this dilemma. The first one was taken by the ENCODE
project, who claimed that the human genome had other unrecognized complex
parts. The other is to reject the human-centric method of understanding and
look at animal evolution from bottom up. That is the approach being taken by
Casey Dunn and a few others.

In the meanwhile, ENCODE backers have not given up. They are now promoting the
idea that human complexity comes from splicing structures of genes and long
non-coding RNAs. (check - [Human Transcriptome is Extremely Complex and
Snyderome is the Most Complex of
All](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/10/16/human-transcriptome-
extremely-complex-snyders-transcriptome-complex/), and [Alternative Splicing
the New Snake Oil to Explain Human
Complexity](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/12/15/alternative-splicing-
the-new-snake-oil-to-explain-human-complexity/)).

\----------------------------------------------------

**What if cyanobacteria wrote the bacterial history?**

When researchers study bacterial evolution, a bottom up view becomes the norm
rather than exception. If a scientist claims that cyanobacteria or spirochetes
are more complex than all other phyla, she needs to justify it by providing
extensive scientific evidence. However, one difference with animal evolution
is that no researcher is cyanobacteria himself, and therefore there is no role
for 'emotional evidence'.

The situation is quite different for animal evolution, because a human-centric
view is backed by [government agencies supposedly promoting
science](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/01/09/lets-discuss-is-it-time-
to-shut-down-nhgri/). A bottom-up view can be seen as existential threat for
such agencies like NHGRI. It is commendable for Dunn and others to be swimming
against the current and leave a lot of research money on the table.

\--------------------------------------------------------

**Distribution of sequenced animal genomes**

The first figure of their review paper tells us how little attention has been
given on 'other' animal phyla. Please note that the figure uses data from
2012, and some of the ignored branches have fully sequenced genomes now, but
the proportions are very small compared to Craniata and Arthopoda.

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/09/Capture4-300x272.png)

\---------------------------------------------------------

**Abstract -**

> Genome sequences are now available for hundreds of species sampled across
the animal phylogeny, bringing key features of animal genome evolution into
sharper focus. The field of animal evolutionary genomics has focused on
identifying and classifying the diversity genomic features, reconstructing the
history of evolutionary changes in animal genomes, and testing hypotheses
about the evolutionary relationships of animals. The grand challenges moving
forward are to connect evolutionary changes in genomes with particular
evolutionary changes in phenotypes, and to determine which changes are driven
by selection. This will require far greater genome sampling both across and
within species, extensive phenotype data, a well resolved animal phylogeny,
and advances in comparative methods.

