---
title: BMC (Springer) Sends Shockwave through Bioinformatics Community
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
![Capture2](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/11/Capture21-300x54.jpg)
<!--more-->

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/11/Capture3-300x241.jpg)

Everywhere in twitter, bioinformaticians appear to be in shock over Springer-
owned BMC's arbitrary decision to retract Gangolf Jobb's paper for his
political protest over the refugee crisis. A small subset of exemplary tweets
are shown above. Additional details about this developing crisis are posted
[here](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/11/10/springer-ups-ante-in-its-
anti-russia-battle-by-retracting-treefinder-paper/) and
[here](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/10/07/interview-with-gangolf-
jobb-the-author-of-treefinder/). The second link includes an interview with
Gangolf, the courageous author of Treefinder, who continued to make the
software useful for academics using his own money many years after publishing
the original paper that is being retracted for no reason.

**There are several implications of Springer's decision.**

1\. Given that Springer owns both BMC and Nature, many bioinformatics papers
are at risk.

2\. It is safe to say that a large fraction of published bioinformatics
programs from 2004 are not available anywhere. That means those papers are due
for retraction.

3\. If Springer/Nature/BMC claim that they will not apply the same standard to
other papers, that will only prove the political and arbitrary nature of their
current decision.

4\. One can say that Gangolf got punished, because he continued to improve his
program over the years and make it useful for academics eleven years after
publication. Otherwise, nobody would have cared about his decision on license
change. That factor also has major implications for continued development of
bioinformatics programs, and people who have long term plans to do so.

5\. This move by Springer will damage bioinformatics badly, and many authors
interested in maintaining high-quality of their programs will choose not to
publish about their software in journals at all, or take the good versions
closed-source. Retraction used to be a rarely used tool for punishing
scientific fraud. If the same tool can be used by journals to arbitrarily
remove scientific papers a decade or two after publication for flimsy
political reasons, what is the point in paying them big fee for nothing?

6\. Speaking of fraud, the same Springer journals already bent over backwards
to allow Manolis Kellis to change his supplement, when Lior Pachter made a
well-argued case of [real scientific
fraud](https://liorpachter.wordpress.com/2014/02/12/why-i-read-the-network-
nonsense-papers/).

5\. Larger social implication - if you publish scientific paper with Anglo-
Saxon franchises, you will also have to sell your soul to their political
corruption. The message is clear. [Be like Sean Eddy and you will be
rewarded](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/04/09/homolog-us-blog-calls-
for-sean-eddy-be-fired-for-the-sake-of-good-science/). Protest scams inside or
outside science, and you will be punished.

Anyone being able to connect the dots and extend with some imagination will
see the following prediction come true sooner rather than later.

[Outrageous Prediction 2015 USA Will Start to See Exodus of Russian
Scientists](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/03/17/outrageous-
prediction-2015-usa-will-start-to-see-exodus-of-russian-scientists/)

