---
title: The Evolution of the Cilium and the Eukaryotic Cell (Twelve Fundamental Problems
  for Bioinformatics)
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
The origin of cilia and eukaryotic cell are two fundamental problems listed
among [the twelve fundamental problems for
bioinformatics.](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/06/12/where-does-the-
genetic-code-come-from-twelve-fundamental-problems-for-bioinformatics/) The
readers interested in learning about what the issues are may take a look at
the following 2009 paper of Temple Smith (of Smith-Waterman fame).
<!--more-->

[The evolution of the cilium and the eukaryotic
cell](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19253335)

> The Cilium, the Nucleus and the Mitochondrion are three important organelles
whose evolutionary histories are intimately related to the evolution and
origin of the eukaryotic cell. The cilium is involved in motility and sensory
transduction. The cilium is only found in the eukaryotic cells. Here we show
that eight gene duplications prior to the last common ancestor of all extant
eukaryotes account for the expansion of the Heavy Chain Dynein family of motor
proteins and the evolution of the complexity of the cilium. The ambiguities in
the branching of the phylogenetic tree of the HC-Dyneins were resolved by
creating well-defined subtrees and using them to create the full tree. Due to
the intimate relationship between the nucleus, the division center, mitosis
and the basal body/centriole, the evolution of the cilium can now be related
to the evolution of mitosis. In addition, the analysis of the cilium rules out
its endosymbiotic origin from a phagocytosis of a bacterium.

Temple Smith is also busy solving the [most difficult problem in computational
biology](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/06/03/the-most-difficult-
problem-in-computational-biology/), which involves figuring out how the
translational machinery and genetic code came into place.

