---
title: Condensed Matter Physicist Leo Kadanoff Passes Away
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
<!--more-->

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/8an6x-NLfIc" frameborder="0"> </iframe>

I was sad to learn from Jason Chin that eminent condensed matter physicist
[Leo Kadanoff](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leo_Kadanoff) recently passed
away. He was definitely among the smartest people around. Although I never met
him personally, he influenced my life in profound ways. In 1967, he wrote a
'throw away' book explaining non-equilibrium Green functions, and that book
(discovered by my adviser) became the starting material for my graduate
research. Thanks to Kadanoff's excellent maths, my first paper using his
theory turned out to be among the most cited theoretical papers in molecular
electronics (aka nanotechnology).

I use the word 'throw away', because Kadanoff's real research in those years
was on scaling and criticality, and his contributions were no less in that
field. Kenneth Wilson built on Kadanoff's theory to go on to receive Nobel
prize in physics in 1982, whereas the physics community was surprised that
Kadanoff was not included for the award. Taking from Kadanoff's obituary
published in [NY Times](http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/02/science/leo-p
-kadanoff-physicist-of-phase-transitions-dies-at-78.html?_r=0) \-

> Dr. Kadanoff turned to a simple model of another second-order phase
transition, ferromagnetism. In some materials, atoms, like tiny bar magnets,
line up to produce a magnetic field. As the temperature rises, the atoms
become jumbled, and the magnetic field diminishes; above a certain
temperature, the magnetic field disappears.

.....

At Cornell, another physicist, Kenneth G. Wilson, took Dr. Kadanoffs work and
came up with a more general mathematical theory.

The approach proved useful in understanding not only phase transitions but
also a wide range of phenomena, including the interactions of elementary
particles and how a drop of water breaks in two.

In 1980, Dr. Kadanoff shared a prestigious physics prize from the Wolf
Foundation in Israel with Dr. Wilson and Michael Fisher, one of Dr. Wilsons
collaborators.

Two years later, the Nobel Prize in Physics honored the same advances, but
only Dr. Wilson received the prize. At the time, Dr. Wilson said he would have
expected the Nobel committee to honor Dr. Fisher and Dr. Kadanoff as well.

I came across an excellent blog post about Kadanoff by [Lubo Motl
Pilsen](http://motls.blogspot.com/2015/10/leo-kadanoff-1937-2015.html), where
he wrote -

> During the funeral, his daughter modestly pointed out that when he was in
his 50s, his switched from making discoveries to making great new people.

That reminds me that years later I was introduced to bioinformatics by one of
Kadanoff's very smart student, who worked with him during those years of
'making great new people'.

