---
title: How Do Fish Hear?
categories:
- ncRNA
---
Evolution of hearing is a fascinating topic. Here are some websites to start
with.
<!--more-->

[How do fish hear?](http://www.dosits.org/animals/soundreception/fishhear/)

It is a highly informative website describing both inner ear and lateral
lines.

> The bodies of fish have approximately the same density as water, so sound
passes right through their bodies, which move in concert with the traveling
sound wave. Fish have bones in the inner ear, called otoliths, which are much
denser than water and the fish's body. As a result, these ear bones move more
slowly in response to sound waves than does the rest of the fish. The
difference between the motion of the fish body and the otoliths bend or
displace the cilia on the hair cells that are located in the inner ear. This
differential movement between the sensory cells and the otolith is interpreted
by the brain as sound. Otoliths are made of calcium carbonate and their size
and shape is highly variable among species.

The following site primarily deals with inner ear development in humans, but
also has information on fish and other species.

[Inner Ear
Development](https://embryology.med.unsw.edu.au/embryology/index.php/Hearing_-
_Inner_Ear_Development)

\---------------------------------------

Review papers -

[Cells, molecules and morphogenesis: the making of the vertebrate
ear](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0006899306005075)

> The development and evolution of mechanosensory cells and the vertebrate ear
is reviewed with an emphasis on delineating the cellular, molecular and
developmental basis of these changes. Outgroup comparisons suggests that
mechanosensory cells are ancient features of multicellular organisms.
Molecular evidence suggests that key genes involved in mechanosensory cell
function and development are also conserved among metazoans. The divergent
morphology of mechanosensory cells across phyla is interpreted here as deep
molecular homology that was in parallel shaped into different forms in each
lineage. The vertebrate mechanosensory hair cell and its associated neuron are
interpreted as uniquely derived features of vertebrates. It is proposed that
the vertebrate otic placode presents a unique embryonic adaptation in which
the diffusely distributed ancestral mechanosensory cells became concentrated
to generate a large neurosensory precursor population. Morphogenesis of the
inner ear is reviewed and shown to depend on genes expressed in and around the
hindbrain that interact with the otic placode to define boundaries and
polarities. These patterning genes affect downstream genes needed to maintain
proliferation and to execute ear morphogenesis. We propose that fibroblast
growth factors (FGFs) and their receptors (FGFRs) are a crucial central node
to translate patterning into the complex morphology of the vertebrate ear.
Unfortunately, the FGF and FGFR genes have not been fully analyzed in the many
mutants with morphogenetic ear defects described thus far. Likewise, little
information exists on the ear histogenesis and neurogenesis in many mutants.
Nevertheless, a molecular mechanism is now emerging for the formation of the
horizontal canal, an evolutionary novelty of the gnathostome ear. The existing
general module mediating vertical canal growth and morphogenesis was modified
by two sets of new genes: one set responsible for horizontal canal
morphogenesis and another set for neurosensory formation of the horizontal
crista and associated sensory neurons. The dramatic progress in deciphering
the molecular basis of ear morphogenesis offers grounds for optimism for
translational research toward intervention in human morphogenetic defects of
the ear.

[Revisiting cell fate specification in the inner
ear](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959438802002878)

> Generating the diversity of cell types in the inner ear may require an
interplay between regional compartmentalization and local cellular
interactions. Recent evidence has come from gene targeting, lineage analysis,
fate mapping and gene expression studies. Notch signaling and neurogenic gene
regulation are involved in patterning or specification of sensory organs,
ganglion cells and hair cell mechanoreceptors.

[Evolution and development of the vertebrate
ear](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0361923001005585)

> This review outlines major aspects of development and evolution of the ear,
specifically addressing issues of cell fate commitment and the emerging
molecular governance of these decisions. Available data support the notion of
homology of subsets of mechanosensors across phyla (proprioreceptive
mechanosensory neurons in insects, hair cells in vertebrates). It is argued
that this conservation is primarily related to the specific transducing
environment needed to achieve mechanosensation. Achieving this requires highly
conserved transcription factors that regulate the expression of the relevant
structural genes for mechanosensory transduction. While conserved at the level
of some cell fate assignment genes (atonal and its mammalian homologue), the
ear has also radically reorganized its development by implementing genes used
for cell fate assignment in other parts of the developing nervous systems
(e.g., neurogenin 1) and by evolving novel sets of genes specifically
associated with the novel formation of sensory neurons that contact hair cells
(neurotrophins and their receptors). Numerous genes have been identified that
regulate morphogenesis, but there is only one common feature that emerges at
the moment: the ear appears to have co-opted genes from a large variety of
other parts of the developing body (forebrain, limbs, kidneys) and
establishes, in combination with existing transcription factors, an
environment in which those genes govern novel, ear-related morphogenetic
aspects. The ear thus represents a unique mix of highly conserved
developmental elements combined with co-opted and newly evolved developmental
elements.

[The development of the vertebrate inner
ear](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S092547739700155X)

> The inner ear is a complex sensory organ responsible for balance and sound
detection in vertebrates. It originates from a transient embryonic structure,
the otic vesicle, that contains all of the information to develop autonomously
into the mature inner ear. We review here the development of the otic vesicle,
bringing together classical embryological experiments and recent genetic and
molecular data. The specification of the prospective ectoderm and its
commitment to the otic fate are very early events and can be related to the
expression of genes with restricted expression domains. A combinatorial gene
expression model for placode specification and diversification, based on
classical embryological evidence and gene expression patterns, is discussed.
The formation of the otic vesicle is dependent on inducing signals from
endoderm, mesoderm and neuroectoderm. Ear induction consists of a sequence of
discrete instructions from those tissues that confer its final identity on the
otic field, rather than a single all-or-none process. The important role of
the neural tube in otic development is highlighted by the abnormalities
observed in mouse mutants for the Hoxa1, kreisler and fgf3 genes and those
reported in retinoic acid-deficient quails. Still, the nature of the relation
between the neural tube and otic development remains unclear. Gene targeting
experiments in the mouse have provided evidence for genes potentially involved
in regional and cell-fate specification in the inner ear. The disruption of
the mouse Brn3.1 gene identifies the first mutation affecting sensory hair-
cell specification, and mutants for Pax2 and Nkx5.1 genes show their
requirement for the development of specific regions of the otic vesicle.
Several growth-factors contribute to the patterned cell proliferation of the
otic vesicle. Among these, IGF-I and FGF-2 are expressed in the otic vesicle
and may act in an autocrine manner. Finally, little is known about early
mechanisms involved in guiding ear innervation. However, targeted disruption
of genes coding for neurotrophins and Trk receptors have shown that once
synaptic contacts are established, they depend on specific trophic
interactions that involve these two gene families. The accessibility of new
cellular and molecular approaches are opening new perspectives in vertebrate
development and are also starting to be applied to ear development. This will
allow this classical and attractive model system to see a rapid progress in
the near future.

