---
title: 'Everything You Need to Know to Follow #AGBT15'
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
![download](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/02/download.png)
<!--more-->

The AGBT conference is taking place at the beautiful Marco Island, Florida
between Feb 25, 2015 - Feb 28, 2015.

\---------------------

**Previews**

My friend Keith Robison, who writes Omics!Omics! blog, posted an excellent
preview on the conference, listing what to expect (and not expect). You can
read it [here](  http://omicsomics.blogspot.in/2015/02/agbt2015-preview.html).

Keith is very up-to-date and knowledgeable about latest genomics technology,
and his blog was selected by our readers and judges as the ['Best of
2013'](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/01/20/announcing-results-
best-2013/). Here are two other informative posts from Keith related to
AGBT15.

[Illumina Launches NeoPrep (#agbt15)](http://omicsomics.blogspot.in/2015/02
/illumina-launches-neoprep-agbt15.html)

[Can Ion Torrent Buzz Again?](http://omicsomics.blogspot.in/2015/02/can-ion-
torrent-buzz-again.html)

\---------------------

**Conference information**

You can see the
[talks](https://guidebook.com/guide/30132/schedule/#date/02-25-2015) and
[posters](https://guidebook.com/guide/30132/list/103512/) at this website. One
nice aspect of AGBT is that they allow outsiders to see all abstracts on their
website. For some strange reason, CSHL conferences have not mastered this
technology.

\---------------------

**On twitter**

You can follow the conference in twitter [using hashtag
#AGBT15](https://twitter.com/hashtag/AGBT15?src=hash), or simply click on
[this link](https://twitter.com/hashtag/AGBT15?src=hash). A large number of
attendees are live-tweeting the talks. In fact this year, they have made
twittering the default option for all talks, unless the speaker requests
otherwise.

\---------------------

**Is perfect bioinformatician possible?**

I am not attending the conference, but if I wanted to list my reasons for
being there, listening to Gene Myers would have been at the top. Over the last
year, I read almost all of his papers going all the way back to 1980s and
found them to be incredibly good.

As you may have noticed, Gene Myers [came back to the topic of genome assembly
last year](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/02/14/dazzle-assembler-
pacbio-reads-gene-myers/) to revolutionize the field again.

Myers has two talks -

> Is Perfect Assembly Possible?

Gene Myers, Ph.D.

Founding Director, Systems Biology Center, Max Planck Institute

>

Saturday, February 28

Low Coverage, Correction-Free Assembly for Long Reads

Gene Myers, Max Planck Institute CBG

11:20 a.m. 11:40 a.m.

Plenary Session: Genomics II

Islands Ballroom

\---------------------

**Pacbio workshop and live-streaming**

If you are not at the conference, you can still view Gene Myers' talk and a
number of other talks through live-streaming by PacBio. It requires
registration [at the Pacbio website](http://programs.pacificbiosciences.com/l/
1652/2015-02-19/311mx7#event).

Pacbio organized a fantastic line-up of speakers for their workshop. They are
listed below, and you can see more details on posters [from their website](htt
p://programs.pacificbiosciences.com/l/1652/2015-02-19/311mx7#event).

>

WORKSHOP

Palms Ballroom

Friday, February 27, 12:00 p.m. - 2:00 p.m.

Lunch will be served

Towards Comprehensive Genomics - Past Present and Future

Introduction by Michael Hunkapiller

President and Chief Executive Officer, Pacific Biosciences

The Human Genome: From One To One Million

J. Craig Venter, Ph.D.

Co-founder, Chairman, and Chief Executive Officer, Human Longevity Inc.

Is Perfect Assembly Possible?

Gene Myers, Ph.D.

Founding Director, Systems Biology Center, Max Planck Institute

Finishing Genomes: Why Does It Matter?

Deanna Church, Ph.D.

Senior Director of Genomics and Content, Personalis

De Novo Assembly of a Human Diploid Genome for the Asian Genome Project

Jeong-Sun Seo M.D.,Ph.D.

Director Genomic Medicine Institute, Seoul National University College of
Medicine

Founder and Chairman, Macrogen Inc.

PacBio Long Read Sequencing and Structural Analysis of a Breast Cancer Cell
Line

W. Richard McCombie, Ph.D.

Professor, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory

PROGRAM PRESENTATIONS

Thursday, February 26

Resolving the Complexity of Human Genetic Variation by Single-Molecule
Sequencing

Evan Eichler, University of Washington

9:00 a.m. 9:30 a.m.

Plenary Session: Genomics I

Islands Ballroom

Anchored Assembly: Accurate Structural Variant Detection Using Short-Read Data

Jeremy Bruestle, Spiral Genetics

8:30 p.m. 8:50 p.m.

Concurrent Session: Informatics

Salons E & F

Sequencing-Based Approaches for Genome-Scale Functional Annotation

Matthew Blow, D.O.E. Joint Genome Institute

8:50 p.m. 9:10 p.m.

Concurrent Session: Biology

Islands Ballroom

Friday, February 27

Neural Circular RNAs are Derived from Synaptic Genes and Regulated by
Development and Plasticity

Wei Chen, Max-Delbruck-Centrum (MDC)

8:50 p.m. 9:10 p.m.

Concurrent Session: Transcriptomics

Salons G through J

A Genome Assembly of the Domestic Goat from 70x Coverage of Single Molecule
Real Time Sequence

Tim Smith, U.S. Meat Animal Research Center

8:50 p.m. 9:10 p.m.

Concurrent Session: Technology

Islands Ballroom

PacBio Application Influenza Viral RNA-Seq

Amy Ly, The Genome Institute at Washington University

9:10 p.m. 9:30 p.m.

Concurrent Session: Technology

Islands Ballroom

Saturday, February 28

Low Coverage, Correction-Free Assembly for Long Reads

Gene Myers, Max Planck Institute CBG

11:20 a.m. 11:40 a.m.

Plenary Session: Genomics II

Islands Ballroom

