---
title: 'REVIEW: Organogenesis in a dish: Modeling development and disease using organoid
  technologies'
categories:
- ncRNA
---
**The making of bodies part by part**
<!--more-->

> Mention of organoids, organlike structure growing in a Petri dish, might
conjure up images of science fiction. However, the generation of organoids is
very real, as is the increased understanding of organ form and function that
comes from studying them. Lancaster and Knoblich review organoids as
structures that include more than one cell type of an organ that exhibit
structural and functional features of the natural counterpart. Knowledge of
normal organ developmental pathways guides the formation of these structures.
Organoids show great promise for modeling human development and disease and
for biomedical research and regenerative medicine.

\------------------

Paper can be accessed
[here](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/345/6194/1247125).

> Background

Because of their differentiation potential, pluripotent stem cells can
generate virtually any cell type and, as such, can be used to model
development and disease and even hold the promise of providing cell-
replacement therapies. Recently, structures resembling whole organs, termed
organoids, have been generated from stem cells through the development of
three-dimensional culture systems.

Organoids are derived from pluripotent stem cells or isolated organ
progenitors that differentiate to form an organlike tissue exhibiting multiple
cell types that self-organize to form a structure not unlike the organ in
vivo. This technology builds upon a foundation of stem cell technologies, as
well as classical developmental biology and cell-mixing experiments. These
studies illustrated two key events in structural organization during
organogenesis: cell sorting out and spatially restricted lineage commitment.
Both of these processes are recapitulated in organoids, which self-assemble to
form the cellular organization of the organ itself.

Graphic

Organoid generation and therapeutic potential. Organoids can be derived for a
number of organs from human pluripotent stem cells (PSCs). Like organogenesis
in vivo, organoids self-organize through both cell sorting out and spatially
restricted lineage commitment of precursor cells. Organoids can be used to
model disease by introducing disease mutations or using patient-derived PSCs.
Future applications could include drug testing and even tissue replacement
therapy.

Advances

Organoids have been generated for a number of organs from both mouse and human
stem cells. To date, human pluripotent stem cells have been coaxed to generate
intestinal, kidney, brain, and retinal organoids, as well as liver organoid-
like tissues called liver buds. Derivation methods are specific to each of
these systems, with a focus on recapitulation of endogenous developmental
processes. Specifically, the methods so far developed use growth factors or
nutrient combinations to drive the acquisition of organ precursor tissue
identity. Then, a permissive three-dimensional culture environment is applied,
often involving the use of extracellular matrix gels such as Matrigel. This
allows the tissue to self-organize through cell sorting out and stem cell
lineage commitment in a spatially defined manner to recapitulate organization
of different organ cell types.

These complex structures provide a unique opportunity to model human organ
development in a system remarkably similar to development in vivo. Although
the full extent of similarity in many cases still remains to be determined,
organoids are already being applied to human-specific biological questions.
Indeed, brain and retinal organoids have both been shown to exhibit properties
that recapitulate human organ development and that cannot be observed in
animal models. Naturally, limitations exist, such as the lack of blood supply,
but future endeavors will advance the technology and, it is hoped, fully
overcome these technical hurdles.

Outlook

The therapeutic promise of organoids is perhaps the area with greatest
potential. These unique tissues have the potential to model developmental
disease, degenerative conditions, and cancer. Genetic disorders can be modeled
by making use of patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells or by
introducing disease mutations. Indeed, this type of approach has already been
taken to generate organoids from patient stem cells for intestine, kidney, and
brain.

Furthermore, organoids that model disease can be used as an alternative system
for drug testing that may not only better recapitulate effects in human
patients but could also cut down on animal studies. Liver organoids, in
particular, represent a system with high expectations, particularly for drug
testing, because of the unique metabolic profile of the human liver. Finally,
tissues derived in vitro could be generated from patient cells to provide
alternative organ replacement strategies. Unlike current organ transplant
treatments, such autologous tissues would not suffer from issues of
immunocompetency and rejection.

\-----------------------------

Another review of the same topic -

[In vitro organogenesis in three dimensions: self-organising stem
cells](http://dev.biologists.org/content/139/22/4111.full)

> Organ formation during embryogenesis is a complex process that involves
various local cell-cell interactions at the molecular and mechanical levels.
Despite this complexity, organogenesis can be modelled in vitro. In this
article, we focus on two recent examples in which embryonic stem cells can
self-organise into three-dimensional structures - the optic cup and the
pituitary epithelium; and one case of self-organising adult stem cells - the
gut epithelium. We summarise how these approaches have revealed intrinsic
programs that drive locally autonomous modes of organogenesis and homeostasis.
We also attempt to interpret the results of previous in vivo studies of
retinal development in light of the self-organising nature of the retina.

