---
title: Report from Asia - Will Asia 'Unfollow' NIH's Failed Research Model?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
In Asia, top-level funding agencies looking for directions for their research
programs are following the US (NIH) model, even though NIH is clearly failing
in its mission compared to most other countries.
<!--more-->

To find the evidence of failure, you can use Francis Collins' own metrics. A
few weeks back, he marketed his precision medicine scam to gullible Americans
by writing -

> As the worlds largest source of biomedical research funding, the US National
Institutes of Health (NIH) has been advancing understanding of health and
disease for more than a century. Scientific and technological breakthroughs
that have arisen from NIH-supported research account for many of the gains
that the United States has seen in health and longevity.

For example, an infant born today in the United States can look forward to an
average lifespan of about 79 yearsnearly 3 decades longer than one born in
1900.

We pointed out in '[Francis Collins Admits NIH Under Him Has Been
Failing](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/01/22/francis-collins-admits-
nih-under-him-has-been-failing/)' that if improvement in life expectancy at
birth is the best measure of performance of NIH, NIH clearly failed during
Collins' time. The earlier post showed that US life expectancy at birth is
lower than almost all advanced country. The extent of failure can be judged by
making comparison with a number of very poor countries around the world, who
cannot afford guitar-playing NIH director.

**1\. Cuba**

Cubans, who had been under US blockade for over five decades, have life
expectancy at birth equal to USA.

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/03/Capture5-300x179.png)

**2\. Vietnam **

Vietnam's life expectancy at birth is 75 years, which is only 4 years less
than USA. This is an amazing achievement given that the country was bombed to
oblivion by USA a few decades back and had no expensive 'National Institute of
Health' since then.

![Capture2](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/03/Capture22-300x187.png)

**3\. Sri Lanka**

Sri Lanka, a country that came out of civil year less than a decade back, has
life expectancy of 74 years.

![Capture2](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/03/Capture23-300x189.png)

**4\. Mexico**

The life expectancy at birth in Mexico is 77 years and their number will cross
USA's in another 5 years at its current rate of growth (see figure),. They
only need to keep [these advocates of 'genomic medicine in
Mexico'](http://genome.cshlp.org/content/18/8/1191.long) at bay.

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/03/Capture6-300x187.png)

**5\. Chile**

Chile was run by a brutal dictator until 1990, when the human genome project
started. Their life expectancy at birth is now higher than USA's.

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/03/Capture7-300x181.png)

All those evidences show that instead of following what NIH is doing, Asian
countries need to figure out what NIH is doing wrong and save the cost of an
ineffective bureaucracy. Dan Graur offers some help -

[What Do You Know About The Delusional
@NIHDirector?](http://judgestarling.tumblr.com/post/115033566791/what-do-you-
know-about-the-delusional)

> Francis Collins is the Director of the NIH. During his tenure, Big Science
flourished and Real Science wilted. Francis Collins doesnt think junk DNA
exists, which is quite reassuring given that he believes in virgin birth, the
resurrection of corpses, and the second coming of Jesus Christ. He frequently
falls on his knees and thanks JC for all kinds of things, such as the
completion of the human genome project in 2001. His views on evolution are
peculiar, to say the least.

