---
title: MOOCs Are Actually Books
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Our regular readers are well familiar with the bioinformatics online courses,
books and Rosalind developed by Pavel Pevzner's group. The 2013 article "[MOOC
or MOOR: Is Research the Next Frontier for Online
Education?](http://cacm.acm.org/careers/168337-mooc-or-moor-is-research-the-
next-frontier-for-online-education/fulltext)" described what they were going
to do, and a new article by ("[Life After
MOOCs](http://cacm.acm.org/magazines/2015/10/192385-life-after-
moocs/fulltext)") provides their recent perspective on the experience.
<!--more-->

> Three years ago, Moshe Vardi published an editorial in Communications
expressing concerns about the pedagogical quality of massive open online
courses (MOOCs) and including the sentiment, "If I had my wish, I would wave a
wand and make MOOCs disappear."9 His editorial was followed by studies
highlighting various limitations of MOOCs (see Karsenti5 for a review).

We share the concerns about the quality of early primitive MOOCs, which have
been hyped by many as a cure-all for education.

...

**When Will Massive Open Online Courses Disappear?**

Was the printing press a worthwhile invention? This may seem like a silly
question, but some of the backlash against early MOOCs reminds us of a
criticism of the printing press made by the prominent 15th-century polymath
Johannes Trithemius. Believing printed books were inferior to hand-copied
manuscripts, Trithemius wrote, "The printed book is made of paper and, like
paper, will quickly disappear."

Anyone who has witnessed the beauty of a Renaissance illuminated manuscript
can sympathize with Trithemius. Likewise, anyone who has attended a lecture
delivered by a brilliant teacher in a small classroom can sympathize with
Vardi. Yet in reality, contemporary higher education often falls short of this
ideal.

We have the same vision as Compeau/Pevzner regarding the role of MOOC as an
innovative technology, just like the arrival of printing press during
Renaissance. However, the title of this blog post is about another matter.

The MOOCs got so much criticism, because they have been sold as replacements
of classrooms and teachers. In reality, they are replacements or enhancements
of textbooks. That is because the video-based MOOCs, just like text-based
books, do not have the feedback element built in them. Motivated people may
learn topics by reading textbooks, whereas videos from authors may make the
experience more interesting. Seeing from that way, MOOCs appear like a natural
progression (books --> books with black and white figures --> books with
colored figures --> videos).

Pevzner and his team thought through that aspect and built Rosalind to add an
interactive (and adaptive) element into their course. Everyone I introduced
Rosalind to came to like it.

My only criticism of Pevzner's approach of bioinformatics - it is devoid of
fundamental questions and appears like an engineering discipline. That is a
serious drawback, because a scientific field is defined by the questions being
asked by its practitioners or as Carl Woese said - 'a guiding vision'.
Hopefully, as people come to terms with the technological breakthroughs, they
will get back to asking questions as described
[here](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/10/14/crossroads-iii-a-new-
direction-for-bioinformatics-with-twelve-fundamental-problems/). In this
context, readers may enjoy Carl Woese's

[A New Biology for a New Century

> Science is impelled by two main factors, technological advance and a guiding
vision (overview). A properly balanced relationship between the two is key to
the successful development of a science: without the proper technological
advances the road ahead is blocked. Without a guiding vision there is no road
ahead; the science becomes an engineering discipline, concerned with temporal
practical problems. In its heyday the representation that came to dominate and
define 20th century biology, molecular biology, was a rich and inspiring blend
of the two. By the end of the 20th century, however, the molecular vision of
biology had in essence been realized; what it could see of the master plan of
the living world had been seen, leaving only the details to be filled in. How
else could one rationalize the strange claim by some of the world's leading
molecular biologists (among others) that the human genome (a medically
inspired problem) is the Holy Grail of biology? What a stunning example of a
biology that operates from an engineering perspective, a biology that has no
genuine guiding vision!

Look back a hundred years. Didn't a similar sense of a science coming to
completion pervade physics at the 19th century's endthe big problems were all
solved; from here on out it was just a matter of working out the details? Deja
vu! Biology today is no more fully understood in principle than physics was a
century or so ago. In both cases the guiding vision has (or had) reached its
end, and in both, a new, deeper, more invigorating representation of reality
is (or was) called for.

A society that permits biology to become an engineering discipline, that
allows that science to slip into the role of changing the living world without
trying to understand it, is a danger to itself. Modern society knows that it
desperately needs to learn how to live in harmony with the biosphere. Today
more than ever we are in need of a science of biology that helps us to do
this, shows the way. An engineering biology might still show us how to get
there; it just doesn't know where there is.

