---
title: A Report on our Two Online Bioinformatics Classes so Far
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Our readers are aware that we introduced [web-based bioinformatics training
modules](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/09/01/scripting-for-biology-
online-virtual-classroom-based-module/). So far, we completed one one-month
long class, and another one with ~15 students from China and India [is
currently ongoing](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/10/05/scripting-for-
biology-module-for-students-living-in-asia/). Here are our current assessment
of those two modules.
<!--more-->

The classes work in the following manner. All students join a common
classroom, where we discuss topics related to the subject being taught. During
class, the students are asked to solve problems in the computer account
provided by us, and we monitor their work by accessing their accounts. That
way, we can periodically give feedback to each of them through private
communication, while they are working. If we notice that many of them were
stuck on the same step or are making similar errors, we discuss that aspect in
the classroom.

We had both success and failure with the first class. On the plus side, the
technology worked way better than we expected. The software and chat-based
communication method, which were our biggest worries, had been working
faultlessly after a few initial hiccups.

On the minus side, we realized that our plans were too ambitious for a one
month-long module. We tried to incorporate programming examples from genomics,
but given that the students were learning the programming languages for the
first time, it was difficult for them to even get to genomics and solve
interesting problems. In fact, they did amazingly well despite beginning with
such handicap. The second challenge was that different students proceeded at
different pace, and the class soon went out of sync.

We fixed many of those negatives in the Asian class and it is going a lot more
smoothly. First, we reduced the number of classes to only one/week, but
increased the amount of time per class to two hours. In fact, the classes
always continue longer than what we originally plan. Second, we split the
course material into eight levels (eight classrooms), and students progress
from one level to another after successfully learning the topic. That way,
students in a classroom are always in sync with others. Third, we built a
python sandbox, so that the students do not need to log into linux server on
the first day. Learning a new programming language and a new operating system
together can get a bit overwhelming. Finally, we are putting all course
materials online in book format so that it becomes easy for the students to
read and learn outside classroom.

We will post another update after completion of the Asian module !

