---
title: Happy New Year and a New Direction
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Happy new year everyone !
<!--more-->

Over the last three years, our blog focused on algorithms to analyze next-
generation sequencing data. Most of the kinks on that front have been ironed
out, whereas with availability of so many assembled genomes, it has become
possible to ask interesting questions about genome evolution like never
before.

So, starting from this year, we will change direction to make sense of the
biological contents of eukaryotic genomes. Are there any patterns in genome
evolution? How are those patterns related to the evolution of phenotypes? We
have been doing extensive reading on such topics and posted many related
papers in our ['evolution and ncRNA'](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/ncrna/)
blog. Starting from this year, we will continue to work more actively on these
topics.

[Here](http://bjps.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2014/07/03/bjps.axu002.abs
tract) is a great paper to start with (h/t: @dangraur) -

> Since the late 1990s, the characterization of complete DNA sequences for a
large and taxonomically diverse set of species has continued to gain in speed
and accuracy. Sequence analyses have indicated a strikingly baroque structure
for most eukaryotic genomes, with multiple repeats of DNA sequences and with
very little of the DNA specifying proteins. Much of the DNA in these genomes
has no known function. These results have generated strong interest in the
factors that govern the evolution of genome architecture. While adaptationist
just so stories have been offered (as typically occurs in every area of
biology), recent theoretical analyses based on mathematical population
genetics strongly suggest that non-adaptive processes dominate genome
architecture evolution. This article critically synthesizes and develops these
arguments, explicating a core argument along with several variants. It
provides a critical assessment of the evidence that supports these arguments
premises. It also analyses adaptationist responses to these arguments and
notes potential problems with the core argument. These theoretical analyses
continue the molecular reinterpretation of evolution initiated by the neutral
theory in 1968. The article ends by noting that some of these arguments can
also be extended to evolution at higher levels of organization which raises
questions about adaptationism in general. This remains a puzzle because there
is probably little reason to doubt that many organismic features are genuine
adaptations.

