---
title: Bioinformaticians, Can You Pass That Exam?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Good knowledge of molecular evolution is essential to perform any research in
bioinformatics and computational biology. Unlike the [difficult 8th grade
questions from early 19th
century](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/08/12/1912-eighth-grade-
exam_n_3744163.html) popping up over the internet, today's question paper on
molecular evolution exam is only a week old. Larry Moran, the author of the
highly informative sandwalk blog, posted [the exam
questions](http://sandwalk.blogspot.com/2015/05/molecular-evolution-exam-
april-2015.html) of his undergraduate course on molecular evolution at the
University of Toronto. See whether you can clear it !!
<!--more-->

![gse_multipart7830](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/05/gse_multipart7830.jpg)

> Here's the final exam in my course. Students have to answer the first two
questions and three of the next five questions. How would you do?

1\. Choose a subtopic from your essay and explain it better than you did in
your essay and/or rebut the comments and criticisms made by the marker/grader.

2\. Michael Lynch says in The Origins of Genome Architecture ....

Nothing in Evolution Makes Sense Except in the Light of Population Genetics

Evolution is a population genetic process governed by four fundamental forces,
which jointly dictate the relative abilities of genotype variants to expand
through a species. Darwin articulated a clear but informal description of one
of those forces, selection (including natural and sexual selection), whose
central role in the evolution of complex phenotypic traits is universally
accepted, and for which an elaborate formal theory in terms of changing
genotype frequencies now exists. The remaining three evolutionary forces,
however, are non-adaptive in the sense that they are not the function of the
fitness properties of individuals: mutation (broadly including insertions,
deletions, and duplications) is the fundamental source of variation on which
natural selection acts; recombination (including crossing-over and gene
conversion) assorts variation within and among chromosomes; and random genetic
drift insures that gene frequencies deviate a bit from generation to
generation independently of other forces. Given the century of theoretical and
empirical work devoted to the study of evolution, the only logical conclusion
is that these four broad classes of mechanisms are, in fact, the only
fundamental forces of evolution. Their relative intensity, directionality, and
variation over time define the way in which evolution proceeds in a particular
context.

Do you agree with Lynch that Nothing in Evolution Makes Sense Except in the
Light of Population Genetics? If so, why isnt population genetics taught in
introductory biology courses? If not, why not?

3\. Imagine that identical female twins were born to a woman in 1000 AD.
Imagine that you could find a direct descendant of each twin in 2015. If you
sequence the complete genomes of the descendants, approximately how many
differences would you expect to find? How do these compare to the differences
between any two randomly selected individuals from the same part of the world?
Explain your reasoning and describe any assumptions you make. Think carefully
before you answer. The second question is the most important one. (Human
mutation rate = 130 mutations per generation. Haploid genome size = 3.2 109
bp.)

4\. Why do some scientists think that there is no unique tree of life?

5\. Many people believe that recombination evolved because it increases
genetic variation in a population and this provided a selective advantage over
species that didnt have recombination. Do you agree with this explanation for
the evolution of recombination? Why, or why not? What are the other
possibilities?

6\. What is evolvability and why could it be important in evolution? Why are
some scientists skeptical of this claim?

7\. Richard Dawkins once wrote,

Even the most ardent neutralist is quite happy to agree that natural selection
is responsible for all adaptation. All he is saying is that most evolutionary
change is not adaptation. He may well be right, although one school of
geneticists would not agree. From the sidelines, my own hope is that the
neutralists will win, because this will make it so much easier to work out
evolutionary relationships and rates of evolution. Everybody on both sides
agrees that neutral evolution cannot lead to adaptive improvement, for the
simple reason that neutral evolution is, by definition, random, and adaptive
improvement is, by definition, non-random. Once again, we have failed to find
any alternative to Darwinian selection, as an explanation for the feature of
life that distinguishes it from non-life, namely adaptive complexity.

Richard Dawkins (1986) The Blind Watchmaker. p. 304

Can you describe situations in Richard Lenskis ongoing evolution experiment
where neutral or deleterious alleles were essential for adaptive change?

The exam is already creating waves around the blogosphere. Comment section of
the post has grown to nearly 90 replies. Also, Arlin Stoltzfus, a researcher
working on mutationism, [wrote a large blog post](http://www.molevol.org/why-
the-four-fundamental-forces-view-is-mistaken/) to present his views on one of
the questions.

> Over at Sandwalk, Larry Moran posted some interesting bits from his
molecular evolution class exam, including a passage from Mike Lynch arguing
for his claim that nothing in evolution makes sense except in the light of
population genetics. In this passage, which Ill quote below, Lynch says that
evolution is governed by 4 fundamental forces.

The idea that evolution is governed by population-genetic forces is common but
fundamentally mistaken. I wish we could just put this to rest.

Enjoy !!

