---
title: Homolog.us Reports from Asia - 'Will Hong Kong be the Bioinformatics Capital
  of the World?'
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
![hero](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/03/hero1-300x213.png)
<!--more-->

**Bioinformatics Research at the University of Hong Kong**

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/03/Capture3.png)

In Hong Kong, I met the research groups of Professors T.-W. Lam and Francis
Chin. I first became familiar with the work from Professor Chin's group after
reading about IDBA in the SPAdes paper. That was covered [in a blog post in
2012](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2012/10/10/multi-kmer-de-bruijn-
graphs/). Separately, Heng Li mentioned about [Professor Lam's elegant 2-way
BWT paper](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/06/01/bi-directional-bwt-or-2
-way-bwt-2bwt/), and I have been following the publications from their group
since then.

![Capture2](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/03/Capture2.png)

Based on reading their papers, I was aware that they have built an effective
and confident team of bioinformatic researchers and took leadership in
multiple areas (use of GPU in bioinformatics, assembly algorithms, alignment
algorithms using BWT). The biggest surprise after visiting them was to find
out how young most members in the group were.

**L3 Bioinformatics**

![L3-Email Signature](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/03/L3-Email-Signature-300x75.png)

Ruibang and Professor Lam started a company named [L3
bioinformatics](http://l3-bioinfo.com/#about-us) and I was fortunate to visit
them as well. When they mention 'young and energetic' in the description, they
do really mean it !

> L3 is a young and energetic company where IT talents, renowned professors
and top-notch industrial partners like BGI work together to invent and develop
the future computing technologies for bioinformatics.

It's never easy to develop state-of-the-art technology which advances genomics
analysis. We need biologists who understand the bleeding edge problems in
genomics analysis. We need experts who knows how to design advanced algorithms
to cope with the problems. We need seasoned IT engineers who know how to put
together the right computing architecture for the designed solutions. And
perhaps the hardest of all, we need a team of all above-mentioned, who can
work together.

L3 is such a team.

**My talk**

I gave a talk at HKU and the theme was what to do with so much sequencing. The
answer to that question would be helpful for bioinformaticians choose
direction for building their tools.

The conventional wisdom says cheap sequencing should be used to sequence the
genomes of millions of people (or Arabidopsis strains), and then align and
compare to find associations with functional properties or diseases. I came to
realize that strategy as wrong, and a better way to proceed would be to [start
with the fundamental (unanswered) questions in living systems and then use
sequencing and bioinformatics to solve
them](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/10/14/crossroads-iii-a-new-
direction-for-bioinformatics-with-twelve-fundamental-problems/). This may or
may not work, but just like mathematics grew immensely through the efforts to
solve unsolved problem (e.g. group theory), bioinformatics and biology can do
the same.

**About University of Hong Kong**

University of Hong Kong started in the same year as the revolution against
Qing dynasty began in China. There were stronger connections between those two
events. [Sun Yat-sen](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sun_Yat-sen), who became
the new leader of China, studied in [Hong Kong College of Medicine for Chinese
](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hong_Kong_College_of_Medicine_for_Chinese), the
precursor of University of Hong Kong. During the next 60 years of turmoil,
Hong Kong University was fortunate to be outside China and survived in its
entirety with all departments.

The major improvements to the university came in the last three decades, and
its program is now very modern and competitive with all other universities
around the world. IMHO, Chinese students with knowledge of math is their
biggest asset. I stopped by the theoretical physics department, and met
[Professor Jian Wang](http://www.physics.hku.hk/people/academic/319). His
group has been doing outstanding work in theoretical physics in areas very
similar to my PhD thesis. Another group led by Professor [Fuchun
Zhang](http://www.physics.hku.hk/~fczhang/index.html) is working on condensed
matter theory, which was my area of major interest during PhD days.

Based on reading their papers and comments from US researchers working in the
same field, they now lead the theoretical research. The same is very likely to
happen to bioinformatics, if it has not happened already.

**About Hong Kong**

This was my first ever visit to Hong Kong, and I found the place teeming with
life even on a late Sunday evening. Before reaching there, I checked google
map street view to find my place of stay. Everything turned out to be alright
except for two small problems. Firstly, I did not realize that the apparently
flat streets in google map were actually up and down a fairly steep hill.
Secondly, a big fat truck was sitting in front of the tiny alley in the google
map view. Not only that truck was gone by the time I reached there, but three
out of four surrounding stores were also gone. Shops disappear as fast as
trucks near the dynamic Central/SOHO area of Hong Kong.

![Capture0](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/03/Capture0-300x119.png)

**Discount airlines of Asia**

I almost missed my chance to visit University of Hong Kong, were it not for my
procrastination and discount airlines. Yes, procrastination helped me make
this trip happen.

Here is how. While planning my trip from India, I emailed Ruibang to check
about their availability, but did not get any reply for several days. Usually
he is prompt with emails except when he makes business trips inside China or
works on [another mega-paper](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/09/25
/megahit-an-ultra-fast-single-node-solution-for-large-and-complex-
metagenomics-assembly-via-succinct-de-bruijn-graph/). This turned out to be
neither as I later found out by checking with Professor Lam. This time, my
email got lost in transit.

Thanks to not buying plane tickets until the last moment (hours before
starting the trip), I could make a small tweak in the travel plan and add Hong
Kong in the wish list. Then Ruibang, Professor Lam and the super-efficient
secretary at their department managed to schedule my talk with just one day
notice.

The real message here is that, in Asia, one can plan and tweak one's trip
until the last moment, because one can always find a really inexpensive ticket
from myriads of discount airlines. Just buy and hop into one-way flights from
Indigo, Air Asia, Tiger Air, Scoot Airlines and think about the next leg
later. For hotel stay, I often used airbnb.

I took Thai Airlines from Kolkata to Bangkok, Air Asia from Bangkok to
Singapore, Tiger Air from Singapore to Hong Kong, Air Asia from HK back to
Bangkok - all individual one-way segments.

**Summary and Comparison of Hong Kong/Singapore**

In the following post, I will cover Singapore and compare the two cities based
on my experience and limited perspectives.

