---
title: Where Does the Genetic Code Come From?  (Twelve Fundamental Problems for Bioinformatics)
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
A few months back, in a series of three posts, we urged bioinformaticians and
computational biologists ([they mean same
thing](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2012/08/22/bioinformatics-and-
computational-biology-same-si-si-si/)) to think about the fundamental problems
in biology, and then build tools to take advantage of massive next-generation
sequencing data sets to solve those fundamental problems.
<!--more-->

[Bioinformatics at a Crossroad Again Which Way
Next?](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/08/11/bioinformatics-at-a
-crossroad-again-which-way-next/)

[Crossroads (ii) Is It Too Late to Acknowledge that Systems Biology and GWAS
Failed?](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/09/02/crossroads-ii-is-it-too-
late-to-acknowledge-that-systems-biology-and-gwas-failed/)

[Crossroads (iii) a New Direction for Bioinformatics with Twelve Fundamental
Problems](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/10/14/crossroads-iii-a-new-
direction-for-bioinformatics-with-twelve-fundamental-problems/)

>

i) Prokaryote-eukaryotic discontinuity

ii) Evolution of eukaryotic cilia

iii) Origin of life RNA world

iv) Origin of sex in eukaryotes

v) Neuro-muscular junction and role of electricity

vi) Flexibility of genome

vii) Animal body plan

viii) Evolution of receptors

ix) Death and Aging

x) Evolution of immune systems in eukaryotes

xi) Evolution of Metabolic Network and Photosynthesis

xii) Brain, intelligence, Consciousness (and maybe Eusociality in bees/ants)

To initiate the effort, we listed the above twelve fundamental problems and
wrote several blog posts to link to relevant papers on those topics. Many of
those posts can be found in our ['evolution and ncRNA'
section](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/ncrna/), which happens to be the least
visited one !

On the third problem, Mike White posted an interview with Dr. Charles Carter
in Finch and Pea blog that our readers will find informative. The first part
is online and we will link to the second part, when it appears. Readers may
also take a look at ['The Most Difficult Problem in Computational
Biology'](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/06/03/the-most-difficult-
problem-in-computational-biology/) to find other relevant papers.

[Where Does the Genetic Code Come From? An Interview with Dr. Charles Carter,
Part I.](http://thefinchandpea.com/2015/06/12/where-does-the-genetic-code-
come-from-an-interview-with-dr-charles-carter-part-i/)

> The genetic code is one of biologys few universals*, but rather than being
the result of some deep underlying logic, its often said to be a frozen
accident the outcome of evolutionary chance, something that easily could have
turned out another way. This idea, though its often repeated, has been
challenged for decades. The accumulated evidence shows that the genetic code
isnt as arbitrary as we might naively think. And more importantly, this
evidence also offers some tantalizing clues to how the genetic code came to
be.

This origins of the genetic code has long been a research focus of University
of North Carolina biophysicist Charles Carter, and his UNC enzymologist
colleague Richard Wolfenden. They authored a pair of recent papers that
suggest behind the genetic code are actually two codes, reflecting key steps
in its evolution. Dr. Carter kindly agreed to answer some questions about the
papers, which present some interesting results that add to the growing pile of
evidence that the genetic code is much less accidental that it may seem.

These papers deal with the machinery that implements the genetic code.
Conceptually the code is simple: it is a set of dictionary entries or key-
value pairs mapping codons to amino acids. But to make this mapping happen
physically, you need, as Francis Crick correctly hypothesized back in 1958, an
adapter. That adapter, as most of our readers know, is tRNA, a nucleic acid
molecule that is charged with an amino acid.

But the existence of tRNAs creates another coding problem: how does the right
tRNA get paired with the correct amino acid? The answer to this question is at
the heart of the origin of the genetic code, and its the subject of these two
recent papers. More about this story, as well as the first part of my
interview with Dr. Carter, is below the fold.

So how do you get the correct codon/amino acid pairings on a tRNA? This, as
youll remember from your biochemistry courses, is accomplished through a set
of enzymes called tRNA synthetases that charge the tRNAs with their
corresponding amino acid. tRNA synthetases are central to the secret of how
the genetic code evolved. As Dr. Carter noted in a piece about Thawing the
Frozen Accident', The emergence of the genetic code was inseparable from the
ancestry of the RNA adaptors and protein catalysts that implement it now. Hes
been interested in exactly that problem how early RNAs and protein catalysts
developed into the universal coding system we have today.

The striking result in the recent work by Carter and Wolfenden has to do with
how tRNAs are recognized by certain tRNA synthetases. Their results indicate
that tRNAs carry two codes: the well-known one in the anti-codon (the part
that directly matches genetic code codons), and a second one in the acceptor
stem. (See the figure below.)

![tRNA](https://thefinchandpea.files.wordpress.com/2015/06/trna-001.png?w=237&
h=300)

Continue reading [here](http://thefinchandpea.com/2015/06/12/where-does-the-
genetic-code-come-from-an-interview-with-dr-charles-carter-part-i/) and [part
II is posted here.](Where Does the Genetic Code Come From? An Interview with
Dr. Charles Carter, Part II)

> Last week we discussed the general question of how the genetic code evolved,
and noted that the idea of the code as merely a frozen accident an almost
completely arbitrary key/value pairing of codons and amino acids is not
consistent with the evidence that has been amassed over the past three
decades. Instead, there are deeper patterns in the code that go beyond the
obvious redundancy of synonymous codons. These patterns give us important
clues about the evolutionary steps that led to the genetic code that was
present in the last universal common ancestor of all present-day life.

