---
title: Breakdown of Trust
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Berkeley mathematician Lior Pachter exposed Manolis Kellis once again in his
recent post - '[Pachters P-value
Prize](https://liorpachter.wordpress.com/2015/05/26/pachters-p-value-prize/)'.
Previously [he accused Kellis of
fraud](https://liorpachter.wordpress.com/2014/02/12/why-i-read-the-network-
nonsense-papers/) in a number of recent papers. This time the charges are of
lesser degree of being stupid, but on an early and highly cited paper of
Kellis with only two computational authors - Manolis Kellis and Eric Lander.
[Eric Lander](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eric_Lander) is the founding
director of Broad institute and co-chair of U.S. President's Council of
Advisors on Science and Technology.
<!--more-->

![220px-Dr_Eric_Lander,_Director_of_the_Broad_Institute_of_MIT_and_Harvard](ht
tp://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/220px-
Dr_Eric_Lander_Director_of_the_Broad_Institute_of_MIT_and_Harvard.jpg)

While we were reading the highly interesting comments in Pachter's blog, one
of them caught our attention. It came from Pavel Pevzner, who built the SPAdes
assembler and [bioinformatics learning tool Rosalind with collaborators from
Algorithmic Biology lab in Russia](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2012/09/18
/rosalind-project-at-algorithmic-biology-laboratory-st-petersburg/). Pevzner
and Compeau are also the authors of ['Bioinformatics Algorithms An Active
Learning Approach'](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/07/30/a-review-of-
bioinformatics-algorithms-an-active-learning-approach-by-compeau-and-
pevzner/), which is being used as textbook in their Coursera course. Pevzner
wrote -

> Thank you Eric, Lior, Manolis, and everybody who provided comments on this
blog. The KBL paper is now textbook material: just two weeks ago, we taught it
to 1000s students in our Coursera Bioinformatics Algorithms class
(http://coursera.org/course/bioinformatics2), and there will be a section on
KBL in the 2nd volume of our Bioinformatics Algorithms textbook
(http://bioinformaticsalgorithms.org) to come out in July 2015.

In view of the discussion here, I and my co-instructor Phillip Compeau have
decided to make a break in the Coursera course and to ask students to spend a
week reading KBL and related papers, thinking about the posts on the blog, and
perhaps even submitting solutions for the P-value prize challenge :-) We have
excellent students: 13% of them hold Ph.D.s, and 34% hold M.S. degrees. I hope
they will contribute to the discussion in a meaningful and CONCILIATORY way.
Even more importantly, I hope they will learn that they should be skeptical
and double check everything I tell them in class.

Thank you again for providing a great learning opportunity for our students!

What we are seeing is rather ominous. By refusing to take care of rampant
fraud and over-inflated claims in top journals, US/UK scientific establishment
is creating an environment of complete breakdown of trust and end of
scientific progress. Textbook is the primary method of summarizing and passing
down scientific knowledge derived by one generation to another, and therefore
the textbook authors take conservative approach in trusting materials from
recent discoveries. If the abstract of a highly-cited and unchallenged decade-
old paper in a major journal cannot be trusted, then what can be? In this
context, our readers may remember that the main challenge to ENCODE's hype
came from Dan Graur, the author of a well-used textbook in molecular
evolutionary biology. Larry Moran, the author of a leading biochemistry
textbook, has also been [quite critical of claimed made by ENCODE-leader Ewan
Birney](http://sandwalk.blogspot.com/2012/09/encode-leader-says-that-80-of-
our.html).

We also see quite a bit of double standards in how the scientists from
different countries are being treated by US 'scientific leaders' and their
followers. When the Japanese STAP episode surfaced, US media and blogs
maintained by well-known scientists howled for rapid action. All top
newspapers, including NY Times, covered the episode as a major scandal leading
to suicide of the talented embryologist Yoshiki Sasai.

[Scientist Who Had Claimed Stem Cell Breakthrough Resigns From Japanese
Research Institute](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/20/world/asia/scientist-
who-had-claimed-stem-cell-breakthrough-resigns-from-japanese-research-
institute.html)

> In a blow to the prestige of Japans scientific community, a government-
backed research institute accepted the resignation of one of its highest-
profile scientists on Friday after she failed to replicate research results
that were once hailed as a breakthrough in stem cell research.

In contrast, Pachter's previous exposure of supposed fraud by Manolis Kellis
got promptly covered up by the journal. ENCODE-crook Ewan Birney got promoted
in EMBL and also became Fellow of Royal Society despite being exposed, and we
received little support or mention from anyone in the genetics community or
the media for [exposing Barbara Frederickson's PNAS paper connecting gene
expression and happiness](http://www.pnas.org/content/111/35/12705.abstract).
[Yoav Gilad's criticism of mouse
ENCODE](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/05/19/yoavgilad-consortium-on-
results-published-by-encode-and-gtex/) got minimal response from the authors
and Stamatoupolous did not bother to even do that to the Chinese paper
disputing his duon claim.

The situation is far worse. Lander and his protege Manolis Kellis, who are
incapable of doing basic stats, continue to draw humongous amounts of money
from NIH for their 'epigenome roadmap' project that has been criticized by
real scientists like Eric Davidson, Olivert Hobart and Mark Ptashne (check
'[The Conspiracy of Epigenome?](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/02/20
/the-conspiracy-of-epigenome/)'). They and their organization remain media
darlings. Check [Nature Promotes GWAS Madness to Study Mental
Health](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/11/14/nature-promotes-gwas-
madness-to-study-mental-health/) or the following NY Times article published
three months back -

[Project Sheds Light on What Drives
Genes](http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/19/health/scientists-shed-light-on-
circuits-that-control-genes.html?_r=0)

> How does this conspiracy of genes work? asked Eric Lander, director of the
Broad Institute, a genetic research center affiliated with Harvard and M.I.T.,
who is not an author of the new papers. This begins to connect the dots.

[skip]

To find the switches and figure out the circuits that control genes,
researchers examined cells taken from healthy people and from patients
suffering from a range of diseases including multiple sclerosis and diabetes.
They also studied cells from different stages of life, including fetal cells
and stem cells, which are present at the very earliest stage of development.
Using those cells, investigators found millions of switches that control
genes.

The results are published in 24 papers in Nature and other journals from
Nature Publishing. The authors call it a road map to the human epigenome, a
collection of chemical modifications of DNA that alter the way genetic
information is used in different cells.

We now have an unprecedented view of the living human genome, said Manolis
Kellis, a computer scientist at M.I.T. and a leader of the federally funded
project.

Other media coverage of the 'epigenome map' junk science -

Forbes - [In The Book Of Life, A Second Map Is
Established](http://www.forbes.com/sites/sarahhedgecock/2015/02/24/in-the-
book-of-life-a-second-map-is-deciphered/)

LA times - [Roadmap Epigenomics Project reads between DNA's genetic
instructions](http://www.latimes.com/science/la-sci-
epigenome-20150220-story.html)

If you think the textbooks are being irreversibly damaged by inflated claims,
imagine what happens to poor kids learning biochemistry directly from Lander's
own MOOC (online course). [Larry Moran wrote in the sandwalk
blog](http://sandwalk.blogspot.com/2015/03/learn-to-think-like-scientist.html)
\-

> There's a course at MIT (Boston, USA) called "7.00x Introduction to Biology
- The Secret of Life." It's a very popular MOOC (online course). Here's the
trailer for the course. In it, Eric Lander tells you that if you take his
introductory biology course you will learn to think like a scientist and you
will be able to understand the latest breakthroughs.

Here are the week one lectures that focus on biochemistry. I don't have time
to go through it all but check out the description of ATP beginning at 2:13.
This is not how good teachers explain the importance of ATP in the 21st
century but it is how it was taught 40 years ago.

Here's the week two lectures (below). Check out the part at 2:08 where Eric
Lander is talking about the "Energetics of Pathways." See if you agree with
his explanation and his references to entropy. Would you explain this without
talking about forward and reverse rates?

The next section on "Tricks of Pathways" is very interesting. Keep in mind
that he is discussing "tricks" that make glycolysis work but most of those
reactions also work in reverse to make glucose (gluconeogenesis). This gets to
be a problem with trick #2 at 2:25 when he says that an "unfavorable" reaction
can be "pulled" in the right direction if the next reaction in the pathway is
very favorable. This explanation was popular many decades ago but now we know
that almost all the reactions are at equilibrium and ?G = 0.

My point is that just because MIT is a prestigious university and Eric Lander
is a famous scientist, does not mean that this is the best undergraduate
course and the best way to teach biochemistry. Some of my colleagues at
colleges you've never heard of could do a much better job. Eric Lander could
do a better job if he would just read a modern textbook.

\-----------------------------------------------------

In other news, we plan to submit the following entry to Pachter's p-value
challenge.

**Bioinformatics for Married Couples**

Our recent research uncovered new principles at the interface of evolution and
psychology that will lead to better understanding of marriages. Therefore, we
are submitting it to the most visible journal, which happens to be Lior
Pachter's blog.

![images](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/images.png)

Many American marriages end up in divorces. A Japanese-American scientist
noticed the rising trend in 1970 and explained it based on socio-evolutionary
theory in his book. He suggested that man, being a solitary animal, does not
like to remain paired and that is the reason for the rising trend.

His model was never tested experimentally, but due to availability of large-
scale analysis tools, we were able to do that in our lab. We conducted an
experiment, where we placed 457 married couples (457*2 persons) in a room and
picked 80 persons using an elaborate pipeline developed by us (see attached
script). Strikingly, in 95% of cases (72/76), we got only one member of the
couple and not the other, supporting the theory of mentioned Japanese
scientist.

`

#!/usr/bin/perl

#

# put 457 married couples in a room

#

# each member of a couple is assigned a number

#

for($i=1; $i<=457; $i++)

{

push @room,"HUSBAND$i";

push @room,"WIFE$i";

}

#

# pick 80 persons randomly

#

$N=@room;

for($i=0; $i<80; $i++)

{

#

# randomly pick a person

#

$pos=rand; $pos=int($pos*$N);

#

# find the number on it

#

$selected_person=$room[$pos]; $selected_person=~s/HUSBAND//;
$selected_person=~s/WIFE//;

# keep count

$count{$selected_person}++;

}

#

# how many of those 80 will be couples?

#

$same=0;

foreach $key (keys(%count))

{

$same++ if($count{$key}==2);

}

print "$same\n";

`

The above script (our elaborate pipeline) randomly picks 80 persons from a
pool of 457*2. You can see the distribution of number of pairs in the
following figure that is generated by running the script 10000 times.

![count](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/count-
300x300.png)

