---
title: BGI Launched Its Desktop Sequencer BGISEQ-500 in China
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Previously in ["Peak Sequencing? BGI Unveils Nation-scale
Sequencer"](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/06/09/peak-sequencing-bgi-
unveils-nation-scale-sequencer/), we reported about BGI's plans to bring new
'nation-scale' sequencing instrument in the market. It looks like BGI is also
taking care of the other side. At a recent conference, they launched desktop
sequencer based on the technology of Complete Genomics that they bought at
bankruptcy fire-sale a few years back.
<!--more-->

![132a9640_oks_90](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2015/10/132a9640_oks_90-300x200.jpg)

[Genomics.cn reports](http://www.genomics.cn/en/news/show_news?nid=104694) \-

> October 24, 2015, Shenzhen, China-- BGI, the worlds largest genomics
organization, launched its desktop sequencer BGISEQ-500 at the 10th
International Conference on Genomics (ICG-10). It is the second sequencing
system launched by BGI after the supersequencer Revolocity system.

BGISEQ-500 is an integrated desktop sequencing solution with advantages in
accuracy, simplicity, speed, flexibility, and affordable. The accuracy rate of
this new sequencer is 99.99% based on the Complete Genomicss core technology.
BGISEQ-500 achieves the international standard of excellence for sequencing
and meets the demands of clinical application. It integrates the automate
sample preparation, the sequencing process, and data analysis, enabling
various applications on one-touch operation. Moreover, the Radio Frequency
Identification (RFID) technology and barcode scanning allow for automated
sample and reagent tracking and management with a simple touch screen
operation system. Equipped with the built-in automatic analysis software, the
entire processing time from sample to final result can be finished within 24
hours.

BGISEQ-500 can process two chips, FCL and FCS, in a single run. It can achieve
16 sequencing modes with output ranging from 8Gb to 200Gb, addressing
different sequencing demands, thus save the burden to acquire different
systems for different level of throughput. The launch presented the real data
generated by BGISEQ-500 on whole genome sequencing, whole exome sequencing,
genotyping, and RNA quantification etc. Its applications in non-invasive
prenatal test, monogenetic diseases and cancer gene testing were also
demonstrated in this launch. BGISEQ-500 is proven with the power to produce
the most accurate data with consistent performance in comparison with other
systems. It would make the genome sequencing more affordable and accessible
for all users.

Anyone knows the cost of this instrument?

