---
title: Jewish Genetics - Forward Magazine Makes Elhaik's Work Go Viral
tags:
- jewish
- elhaik
categories:
- blog
---
<!--more-->

A few weeks back, we wrote about Dr. Eran Elhaik's new and interesting work on
tracing the roots of Ashkenazi Jews in Northeastern Turkey.

[New Paper by Elhaik Shows that Ashkenazi Jews Came from Northeastern
Turkey](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2016/03/22/new-paper-by-elhaik-shows-
that-ashkenazi-jews-came-from-northeastern-turkey/)

Elhaik relied on his previously published population genetics algorithm that
could [trace the ancestral origin of someone to within a
village](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/04/29/new-method-from-elhaik-
can-find-your-ancestral-village-or-island-of-origin/) based on genomic data.
That work was done in collaboration with National Geographic.

Nevertheless, Elhaik's latest paper did not catch as much attention as it
deserved, until the Forward magazine decided to trash it using the opinions of
a bunch of 'scholars' with no population genetics background.

[Dont Buy the Junk Science That Says Yiddish Originated in
Turkey](http://forward.com/opinion/339676/dont-buy-the-junk-science-that-says-
yiddish-originated-in-turkey/)

The core of their criticism is rather hilarious, because they elevated the
peripheral part of Elhaik's paper to 'central evidence', while downgrading his
DNA evidence to 'belief' system !! In fact, the ignorance of genetics of their
'scholars' is downright scary, because they repeatedly argued how the results
could change with the inclusion of Sephardic Jews. How can evidence derived
from a person's genomic data change with the inclusion of a completely
different person?

> Of the many dubious pieces of evidence presented to support Elhaiks
unorthodox theory is the fact that four villages in ancient Turkey once had
names that sounded something like Ashkenaz. Later in the film Elhaik explains,
without a trace of humor, that Yiddish-speakers talk like Yoda and he even
mentions Yodas use of unusual terms like Jedi and wookies to demonstrate
Yiddishs linguistic properties. Dr. Elhaik, using a tool he designed called
Geographic Population Structure, which he believes can pinpoint the origins of
an ethnic group according to its DNA, published an article in the journal
Genome Biology and Evolution in which he elucidates his theory.

\---------------------------------------------------

Elhaik [wrote](https://khazardnaproject.wordpress.com/2016/05/05/responding-
to-the-criticism-for-des-et-al-2016/) a detailed criticism of the Forward
article in his blog, which we post below.

**Responding to the criticism for Das et al. (2016)**

In Das et al. (2016), we applied the [Geographic Population Structure
(GPS)](http://gbe.oxfordjournals.org/content/8/4/1132.full.pdf+html) algorithm
to the genomes of Yiddish and non-Yiddish speaking Ashkenazic Jews (and other
Jewish and non-Jewish populations) to study the origin of their genomes. Since
genetics, geography, and linguistics are well correlated we surmised that the
origin of the DNA would point to the origin of the Yiddish language.
Surprisingly, GPS traced 93% of the samples to northeastern Turkey where we
found four villages whose names may be derived from the word Ashkenaz. By the
proximity of this region to Slavic lands and combined with other historical
and linguistic evidence our findings were in support of Prof. Wexler's Slavic
hypothesis rather than the dominant Rhineland hypothesis proposing a Germanic
origin to Yiddish.

![map](https://khazardnaproject.files.wordpress.com/2016/05/map.gif?w=640)

The study has been published two weeks ago and has been picked up by the
media. It has been received nearly 100% positive coverage in over [100 media
outlets](http://eranelhaik.staff.shef.ac.uk/Press.html) and numerous blogs.
Expectedly, we have also received a bit of criticism, some of it will be
addressed here and some of it will be ignored because it is merely _ad
hominem_, not science.

**Genetic criticism**

None has been received, however some people have voiced their concerns about
the implications of our results to their potential relatedness to the ancient
Judaeans. I have commented at length on this issue to the [Israeli
Globes](http://eranelhaik.staff.shef.ac.uk/Press/Globes.pdf) (Hebrew).
Briefly, our study did not focus on the origin of Jews or even all Ashkenazic
Jews, but rather the origin of Yiddish using a third of the Ashkenazic Jewish
community for which genomic data were available. Testing whether one is
related to the ancient Judaeans, Jesus, Moses, or Muhammad requires actually
sequencing the genomes of these people and meticulously comparing it with
modern day genomes looking for shared biomarkers. As opposed to the latter
three we actually have plenty of ancient Judaeans skeletons that no one has
ever sequenced (and probably never will). Why the DNA of the ancient Judaeans
has not being sequenced and settle the question of relatedness once and for
all is a question that should be directed to Israeli archeologists. It is most
unfortunate that the members of the general public have been mislead to
believe (no doubt after paying a lot of money to DTC companies) that they are
related to ancient figures without any shred of evidence. However, this is not
something our study aims to prove or disprove.

**Methodological criticism**

In "[Scholars Blast New Study Tracing Ashkenazi Jews to Khazars of Ancient
Turkey](http://forward.com/news/breaking-news/339910/scholars-blast-new-study-
tracing-ashkenazi-jews-to-khazars-of-ancient-turke/#ixzz47lsiSs9u)" Mr.
Liphshiz cites two academics who criticized on our study, or more precisely,
criticized the press release: most blasting indeed. First is Prof. Sergio
DellaPergola, a demographer who proposed that including Sephardic Jews would
have changed our findings.

> serious research would have factored in the glaring genetic similarity
between **Sephardim [_sic_]** and Ashkenazim **[_sic_]**, which mean Polish
Jews are more genetically similar to **Iraqi Jews** than to a non-Jewish Pole.

First, let us start with a basic biology. Each person has unique DNA: studying
the DNA of non-Ashkenazic Jews would not change the DNA of Ashkenazic Jews nor
the predicted origin of their DNA (i.e., ancient Ashkenaz in northeastern
Turkey). GPS is an unbiased algorithm, that is, including or excluding other
samples does not change the results for the test samples. GPS also cannot
relocate the villages bearing the name of Ashkenaz to Germany.

Second, Iraqi and Iranian Jews are extremely similar, and the latter were
indeed included in the study. The genetic similarity between Ashkenazic Jews
and Iranian Jews was explained by their shared Iranian-Turkic past.

**Had Prof. DellaPergola bothered to read our study rather than rely on the above figure, which was produced for the press and for simplicity included only Ashkenazic Jews, he would have found that we have analyzed Sephardic Jews **(The yellow and pink triangles below in Figure 4 from Das et al. 2016 correspond to Iranian and Mountain Jews considered "Sephardic Jews").

![Ashkenaz](https://khazardnaproject.files.wordpress.com/2016/03/ashkenaz.jpg?
w=640)

Third, to date, only three biogeographical analyses were carried out for
Ashkenazic Jews. The first was done by Elhaik (2013) who mapped Ashkenazic
Jews to western Turkey, ~100km away from ancient Ashkenaz and included only
Ashkenazic Eastern European Jews. The second was done by Behar et al. (2013),
who included both Ashkenazic and Sephardic Jews and mapped Ashkenazic Jews to
Eastern Turkey, ~600km away from ancient Ashkenaz. Using a large dataset that
include mostly Ashkenazic Jews and some Sephardic Jews and a more accurate
algorithm, the third study by Das et al. (2016) discovered ancient Ashkenaz.
In summary, all three studies pointed to Turkey. Interestingly, Behar et al.
(2013) interpreted their results in favor of a Middle Eastern (Israelite)
origin, although it is unsupported by their data. The inclusion of Sephardic
samples did not change the Turkish geo location for the latter two studies.

Unlike Prof. DellaPergola, historian Prof. Shaul Stampfer, went to an even
greater length enlightening us with his well supported criticism of our study:

> It is basically nonsense

**Behind the scenes, Prof. Stampfer is harassing people involved in the preparation of my papers alleging that population description was omitted from Elhaik (2013). Unfortunately, this is another case of an academic who may consider reading papers a luxury**. A brief glance at the method section and yes, most unfortunately, the supplementary materials, would have revealed a very detailed description of all population and individuals studied. Unless capable of reading and understanding genomic studies, Prof. Stampfer may be advised to focus on the controversy over Shechita between Hasidim and Mitnagdim, a field which earned him the respect of his peers.

**Linguistic criticism**

The most interesting criticism, in my opinion, is the one that focuses on the
linguistic aspects of Yiddish. It is worth clarifying that we did not carry
out a linguistic but rather a genomic study that yielded biogeographical
predictions, which were interpreted in favour of the Slavic theory over the
Rhineland theory.

Mr. Dovid Katz said to [The Jewish Chronicle](http://www.thejc.com/news/world-
news/157434/oy-gevalt-yiddish-comes-turkey-say-academics) that:

> There is not a single word or sound in Yiddish that comes from Iranian or
Turkish, and older Western Yiddish thrived before there was a single Slavic-
derived word in the language.

The following response was provided by Prof. Paul Wexler, co-author of Das et
al. (2016):

> Unfortunately, I am unable to reply in the most appropriate manner, which
would require publishing my collection of about 800 pages (single-spaced) of
Iranian, Turkic, Tocharian, Mongolian and Chinese influences in Yiddish-both
in the latter's western and eastern variants. Mr. Katz's claim that there are
no Oriental elements in Yiddish and that even Slavic elements do not enter
Western Yiddish until centuries after the alleged rise of the Yiddish language
in the German lands, is totally false. Mr. Katz's remarks are more of an
emotional tirade than a scholarly statement. Apparently, Mr. Katz did not read
(or did read but failed to understand) my recent articles on the subject of
Iranian and Turkic elements, or my many books and articles dating from the
1990s showing the nature of the "Slavicity" of Yiddish. Indeed, to the best of
my knowledge, Katz has no knowledge of Slavic, Iranian, Turkic, etc. so it
would be nearly impossible for him to evaluate my writings and examples (which
I hope soon to publish in a book form). Mr. Katz also does not appear to know
about the pre- and post-World War II writings of Max Weinreich, the doyen of
the field of modern Yiddish linguistics (1894-1969), whom I had the distinct
pleasure of meeting personally. Weinreich wrote that German Yiddish from its
earliest stages (10th c) was in contact with Sorbian, and possibly also with
Polabian, two of the many Slavic languages which reached what is now modern
Germany (both west and east) in the 7th century. Today, Polabian is extinct
(since the late 18th c) but Sorbian survives in two variants in eastern
Germany. To claim that there are no Iranian elements in Yiddish is very
puzzling.

Surely, Mr. Katz knows that the Babylonian Talmud was edited in its final form
by the 6th century, in a territory that was part and parcel of the Iranian
Empire. All Talmudic scholars could tell him of the immense Iranian
philosophical, religious, legal and linguistic imprint on the Talmud. Many of
the Iranianisms in Yiddish passed via Judeo-Aramaic (the language of the
Talmud) into written Hebrew and from there into the later Jewish languages of
varying stocks. My claim goes further: namely, that Jews were intimately
acquainted with Iranian dialects and could not avoid, or did not ever wish to
avoid, importing hundreds and maybe even thousands of covert and overt
Iranianianims into Yiddish, etc.

The existence of Iranianisms in Yiddish was known also to scholars of Iranian
and Slavic. The very distinguished general and Slavic linguist, Roman
Jakobson, wrote in the 1960s that Yiddish paskudnik, paskudnjak 'scoundrel',
though it bore a very close similarity to the coterritorial Slavic languages,
was ultimately of Iranian origin (it also appears in the Talmud). Under
Ukrainian influence, the Yiddish Iranianism adopted non-Jewish Slavic form-
except that -njak in the second variant, though theoretically possible in
Ukrainian, is unattested. The Yiddish word has also been discussed in the
Iranian linguistic literature. Is this "off-the-wall linguistics", to quote
Katz?

Finally, Mr. Katz seems to think that the term "Ashkenaz" has always been
associated with the German lands, the alleged homeland for him of the North
European Jews. I would advise Mr. Katz to read the writings of Sa'adya Gaon,
the 10th century scholar from Baghdad who understood that Ashkenaz meant
"Slavic" (he is not the only writer of that age who thought so). I would
advise Mr. Katz to read the Caucasian ethnographic literature of the 1920s
where the term Ashkenaz was still being used by local peoples, both Jewish and
non-Jewish. I would advise Mr. Katz to have a look at the writings of Wilhelm
Bacher, the eminent Iranianist, writing (around the turn of the 20th century)
about a 14th-century Uzbek Jew who composed the first extant Hebrew-Persian
dictionary and who described himself (a native of Urgench) as "Ashkenazic".

I am very grieved by Mr. Katz's ignorance, since I have known him since the
1980s. In those days he wrote several ground-breaking articles on Yiddish
which earned him the respect and admiration of all Yiddishists. Unfortunately,
he did not live up to his promise.

Das et al. study was published in
[GBE](http://gbe.oxfordjournals.org/content/8/4/1132.full.pdf+html).

