---
title: Was Google Really Censoring Elhaik's Khazar Research in 2013?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
In 2013, Dr. Elhaik complained about his home page at John Hopkins University
mysteriously disappearing from google searches right after [his first Jewish
genomics paper](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/01/22/new-study-sheds-
light-on-the-origin-of-the-european-jewish-population/) started to gain
attention. We reproduced his complaint here, and then his page came back on
top again after a few days.
<!--more-->

[Google Censorship: Scariest Thing for Academic
Freedom](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/05/13/google-censorship-
scariest-thing-for-academic-freedom/)

Readers found those accusations rather hysterical and attributed the
disappearance (and reappearance) to something as mundane as 'search algorithm
update'. It was a time before Snowden release, when the crooks running Google
and Facebook were seen as various reincarnations of Buddha.

It is increasingly becoming clear that those 'search algorithms' and 'trending
news' may be more than something generated by a fully-automated cluster of
servers near Oregon-Washington border processing large amount of clicks and
links. In 2014, RT posted an article on "[Censorship war: Website unmasks
links Google is blocking from search results](https://www.rt.com/news/173308
-hidden-censorship-forgotten-google/)", but the evidence of censorship was
still indirect. More direct evidence regarding Facebook came yesterday, when
Gizmodo published -

[Want to Know What Facebook Really Thinks of Journalists? Here's What Happened
When It Hired Some](http://gizmodo.com/want-to-know-what-facebook-really-
thinks-of-journalists-1773916117)

> According to former team members interviewed by Gizmodo, this small group
has the power to choose what stories make it onto the trending bar and, more
importantly, what news sites each topic links out to. We choose whats
trending, said one. There was no real standard for measuring what qualified as
news and what didnt. It was up to the news curator to decide.

....

They were also told to select articles from a list of preferred media outlets
that included sites like the New York Times, Time, Variety, and other
traditional outlets. They would regularly avoid sites like World Star Hip Hop,
The Blaze, and Breitbart, but were never explicitly told to suppress those
outlets. They were also discouraged from mentioning Twitter by name in
headlines and summaries, and instead asked to refer to social media in a
broader context.

News curators also have the power to deactivate (or blacklist) a trending
topica power that those we spoke to exercised on a daily basis. A topic was
often blacklisted if it didnt have at least three traditional news sources
covering it, but otherwise the protocol was murkymeaning a curator could
ostensibly blacklist a topic without a particularly good reason for doing so.
(Those we interviewed said they didnt see any signs that blacklisting was
being abused or used inappropriately.)

CNET summarized the article in one line that says all -

[Facebook's trending news feed may be a sham](http://www.cnet.com/news
/facebooks-trending-news-feed-may-be-a-sham/)

> The world's largest social network calls out the top trending stories on its
site, which is visited by more than a billion people every day. But the list
may be manipulated by Facebook's employees, who are allegedly deciding what's
"trending" based on their political views.

Zerohedge reports -

[Facebook Workers Admit They "Routinely" Suppressed Conservative
News](http://www.zerohedge.com/news/2016-05-09/facebook-workers-admit-they-
routinely-suppressed-conservative-news)

Therefore, we reopen our old question - was Google really censoring (i.e.
manually filtering out) Elhaik's Khazar research in its search results? Answer
to this question is important, because many researchers now rely on searches
at google scholar, whose results are now seen as sacrosanct as Google searches
in 2013.

We presume answers will not be coming anytime soon given that Google has
bigger issues to resolve :)

[Google planned to help Syrian rebels bring down Assad regime, leaked Hillary
Clinton emails claim](http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/gadgets-and-
tech/news/google-syria-rebels-defection-hillary-clinton-emails-
wikileaks-a6946121.html)

[Clinton email reveals: Google sought overthrow of Syria's
Assad](http://www.washingtonexaminer.com/clinton-email-reveals-google-sought-
overthrow-of-syrias-assad/article/2586300)

\-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----
