---
title: Clinton Emails Reveal Google Played Active Role in Trying to Overthrow Syrian
  Government
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
When, in the past, we argued that google was a truly evil company, [our
readers disagreed](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/06/10/titus-brown-
offers-new-class-on-internet-realities/). Newly released evidences suggest our
assertion was correct.
<!--more-->

[Clinton email reveals: Google sought overthrow of Syria's
Assad](http://www.washingtonexaminer.com/clinton-email-google-sought-
overthrow-of-syrias-assad/article/2586300)

It is important to note that trying to overthrow UN-recognized government is
illegal under the charter of United Nations.

>

Google in 2012 sought to help insurgents overthrow Syrian President Bashar
Assad, according to State Department emails receiving fresh scrutiny this
week.

Messages between former secretary of state Hillary Clinton's team and one of
the company's executives detailed the plan for Google to get involved in the
region.

....

"Given how hard it is to get information into Syria right now, we are
partnering with Al-Jazeera who will take primary ownership over the tool we
have built, track the data, verify it, and broadcast it back into Syria," he
said.

"Please keep this very close hold and let me know if there is anything [else]
you think we need to account for or think about before we launch. We believe
this can have an important impact," Cohen concluded.

...

The message was addressed to deputy secretary of state Bill Burns; Alec Ross,
a senior Clinton advisor; and Clinton's deputy chief of staff, Jake Sullivan.
Sullivan subsequently forwarded Cohen's proposal to Clinton, describing it as
"a pretty cool idea."

Cohen worked as a low-level staffer at the State Department until 2010, when
he was hired to lead Google Ideas, but was tied to the use of social media to
incite social uprisings even before he left the department. He once reportedly
asked Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey to hold off of conducting system maintenance
that officials believed could have impeded a brief 2009 uprising in Iran.

The unusual involvement by Google in foreign affairs highlights the difficulty
of involvement in the internal politics of foreign states. While Cohen seemed
to consider his company's effort as helpful to American interests, the effort
to overthrow Assad helped spur the rise of the Islamic State, which eventually
filled a vaccuum resulting from Assad's loss of control over of Syria.

