---
title: Peak Sequencing and 'Moore's Law' Deception
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Our earlier article on [Illumina's surprise
announcement](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2016/04/21/illuminas-surprise-
announcement-is-not-surprising/) received a number of informative comments. We
like to discuss them here, but first it is important to explain the term 'peak
sequencing' properly. That explanation requires us to discuss the relevance of
using Moore's law for sequencing.
<!--more-->

Poser syndrome is quite common among humans. During 1999-2000, every Silly con
valley startup wanted to be 'the next yahoo', and nobody wanted to imitate
Steve Jobs. Steve Jobs was considered a failure (despite his success with
Pixar), whereas yahoo was the future of internet. Fifteen year later, everyone
wants to be 'the next Steve Jobs' and no yahoo fan is left.

![costpermb2015_4](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2016/04/costpermb2015_4-150x150.jpg)

However, the commonly uses [Moore's law in
sequencing](https://www.genome.gov/27541954/dna-sequencing-costs/) chart is
the mother of all poser syndrome cases.

First, the chart is misleading, because the chart is not adjusted for quality
of sequencing. In contrast, a transistor is a switch, be it in 5 micron
technology or 14 nanometer technology. The semiconductor industry puts
together all pieces to make sure the fundamental definition of MOSFET switch
is not broken.

Second, sequencing cost is a meaningless measure within the big world of
biomedical research and development, whereas transistor density is at the core
of business proposition for many companies. In contrast, the bottom-line of
hardly any company improves with Moore's law like decrease in sequencing cost.

That brings us to 'peak sequencing'. The importance of sequencing, and
especially genome sequencing, was brought to the fore by propaganda leading up
to the human genome project. That created a pent up demand for sequencing of
other genomes, because many scientists saw ticket to high-profile papers by
catching an interesting organism and sequencing its genome. There was no
reason to expect the genome of an ant to be as social as an ant, or the genome
of scarlet macaw to be as colorful scarlet macaw, but the pictures of
interesting animals do make good journal covers. On top of that, NHGRI, the
dysfunctional government agency that sponsored ENCODE, dreamed up of various
make-believe uses of sequencing.

The entire enterprise failed, because the breadth of imagination of central
planners could not keep up with the reduced cost of sequencing and other
emergent technologies. The business case did not develop as anticipated,
whereas the top journals made increasing demands on the genome projects, such
as asking for two genomes, ten genomes, one thousand genomes and so on, before
allocating them precious space. Scientists saw better opportunities elsewhere
and moved on. Scientists are rational actors in this situation.

In our humble opinion, the peak of that shift came around late 2014-early
2015. Maybe this humorous post in parody site 'The Science Web' marked the
peak.

[90% of researchers sequencing things because they cant think of anything else
to do](https://thescienceweb.wordpress.com/2014/12/01/90-of-researchers-
sequencing-things-because-they-cant-think-of-anything-else-to-do/)

> Cambridge, MA. 90% of genomics researchers are sequencing things because
they exist in a complete intellectual vacuum and cant think of anything else
to do, a recent survey suggests.

The survey asked the simple question: If you are currently involved in a
genome sequencing project, can you identify any real reasons why?. 92% of the
10,000 scientists surveyed ticked no. In the comments box beneath the
question, respondents had written if it moves, sequence it, I dont understand
the question and you could sequence an ants scrotum and Genome Research would
publish it.

Recent papers in genomics include those describing the genome of the cucumber,
the genome of the centipede and the genome of the ferret. Some have suggested
that scientists are simply following the alphabet, but Arthur MacDaniel of the
Wide Institute denies this: Following the alphabet would imply that
genomicists are following some kind of logic or rational; theyre not. Their
motto is sequence first, think later but too often they only complete half of
those tasks. These guys are frothing at the mouth for DNA. In fact, theyd
sequence the froth and submit it to Nature if they could Arthur continued.

So, our 'peak sequencing' call does not mean researchers will not continue to
do more sequencing in future, but this 'sequence if you cant think of anything
else to do' madness has ended.

\--------------------------------------------------

Going back to specific comments -

[Link](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2016/04/21/illuminas-surprise-
announcement-is-not-surprising/#comment-129944)

> Interesting enough Pacbio had a strong quarter, particularly in Europe. Id
say its not so much the market slowing but that Illumina has some decent
competition now.

In our understanding, those using Pacbio are not trying to get genome papers.
Many of them realize that they already got their fifteen minutes of fame by
publishing genome papers in visible journals, but cannot do much research with
that genome split into countless contigs and scaffolds. Therefore, we do not
expect a lot of big genome papers from those efforts, but the technology will
continue to make inroads among serious scientists.

> In my eyes Illumina unfortunately does not have any competition at the
moment (perhaps the BGI-seq? but this exists only in China). PacBio has its
niche, but this is small niche.

Illumina is however manipulating the market perhaps a bit too much with their
X-series sequencers (e.g. selling the same costly reagents to companies/huge-
institutes which buy 5 or 10 X-series sequencers at a third of the price that
regular customers are paying.)

Why would smaller regular customers (which previously certainly made up the
majority of instrument purchases) invest into new $100,000 machines if the
monopolist is making arbitrary reagent pricing decisions and makes up
arbitrary limitations on what people are allowed to sequence or not (and then
changes these rules annually)? Due to its monopoly Illumina is in a position
to arbitrarily manipulate the market and they are doing so thus purchasing a
new pricey instrument becomes too risky for small institutes and Illuminas
manipulations are backfiring.

Illumina's success since 2008 is due to confluence of two factors -

(i) pent up demand for mindless sequencing due to NIH/NHGRI propaganda since
human genome project, and top journals giving space to publication of genomes,
just because the organisms are interesting.

(ii) Obama stimulus grant ([American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009](ht
tps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/American_Recovery_and_Reinvestment_Act_of_2009))
and various similar post-2008 crash spending all over the world. Illumina
happened to be in the right place at right time.

With tightening budgets and lack of free money, the scientists are getting
smarter as highlighted by your comment ("Why would smaller regular customers
invest into new $100,000 machines.."). Given that the scientists are in the
business of publishing most interesting papers with the least effort,
sequencing may not be the avenue they choose.

