---
title: Enabling the democratization of the genomics revolution with a fully integrated
  web-based bioinformatics platform
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
[Looks quite
promising](http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2016/02/21/040477?rss=1). (h/t:
@lexnederbragt)
<!--more-->

> Continued advancements in sequencing technologies have fueled the
development of new sequencing applications and promise to flood current
databases with raw data. A number of factors prevent the seamless and easy use
of these data, including the breadth of project goals, the wide array of tools
that individually perform fractions of any given analysis, the large number of
associated software/hardware dependencies, and the detailed expertise required
to perform these analyses. To address these issues, we have developed an
intuitive web-based environment with a wide assortment of integrated and
cutting-edge bioinformatics tools. These preconfigured workflows provide even
novice next-generation sequencing users with the ability to perform many
complex analyses with only a few mouse clicks, and, within the context of the
same environment, to visualize and further interrogate their results. This
bioinformatics platform is an initial attempt at Empowering the Development of
Genomics Expertise (EDGE) in a wide range of applications.

Readers may also look at -

[Kronos: a workflow assembler for genome analytics and
informatics](http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2016/02/19/040352?rss=1)

> Background: The field of next generation sequencing informatics has matured
to a point where algorithmic advances in sequence alignment and individual
feature detection methods have stabilized. Practical and robust implementation
of complex analytical workflows (where such tools are structured into "best
practices" for automated analysis of NGS datasets) still requires significant
programming investment and expertise. Results: We present Kronos, a software
platform for automating the development and execution of reproducible,
auditable and distributable bioinformatics workflows. Kronos obviates the need
for explicit coding of workflows by compiling a text configuration file into
executable Python applications. The framework of each workflow includes a run
manager to execute the encoded workflows locally (or on a cluster or cloud),
parallelize tasks, and log all runtime events. Resulting workflows are highly
modular and configurable by construction, facilitating flexible and extensible
meta-applications which can be modified easily through configuration file
editing. The workflows are fully encoded for ease of distribution and can be
instantiated on external systems, promoting and facilitating reproducible
research and comparative analyses. We introduce a framework for building
Kronos components which function as shareable, modular nodes in Kronos
workflows. Conclusion: The Kronos platform provides a standard framework for
developers to implement custom tools, reuse existing tools, and contribute to
the community at large. Kronos is shipped with both Docker and Amazon AWS
machine images. It is free, open source and available through PyPI (Python
Package Index) and https://github.com/jtaghiyar/kronos. Keywords: genomics;
workflow; pipeline; reproducibility

