---
title: Future of Science is Being Decided in Aleppo, Syria
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
The Science Alert website posted an article on the sci-hub site.
<!--more-->

[Researcher illegally shares millions of science papers free online to spread
knowledge](http://www.sciencealert.com/this-woman-has-illegally-uploaded-
millions-of-journal-articles-in-an-attempt-to-open-up-science)

Here is the 'he says, she says' part from the article.

**sci-hub is bad** -

> The big publishers are pissed off. Last year, a New York court delivered an
injunction against Sci-Hub, making its domain unavailable (something Elbakyan
dodged by switching to a new location), and the site is also being sued by
Elsevier for "irreparable harm" - a case that experts are predicting will win
Elsevier around $750 to $150,000 for each pirated article. Even at the lowest
estimations, that would quickly add up to millions in damages.

**sci-hub is good** \- 

> She also explains that the academic publishing situation is different to the
music or film industry, where pirating is ripping off creators. "All papers on
their website are written by researchers, and researchers do not receive money
from what Elsevier collects. That is very different from the music or movie
industry, where creators receive money from each copy sold," she said.

Irrespective of those emotional points, the article makes clear that the site
has no worry about being shut down, as long as it is deemed legal in Russia.

Astute readers may realize that we are seeing a reversal from the events of
400 years back, when the British empire rose on the back of pirates. Naval
trading to Asia was the 'cutting edge industry' of that time. If you check the
[list of pirates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_pirates#Golden_Age_of_
Piracy:_1690.E2.80.931730) during the 'golden age of piracy' and before, you
will find most representatives from UK and Scotland.

> England and Scotland practiced privateering both separately and together
after they united to create the Kingdom of Great Britain in 1707. It was a way
to gain for themselves some of the wealth the Spanish and Portuguese were
taking from the New World before beginning their own trans-Atlantic
settlement, and a way to assert naval power before a strong Royal Navy
emerged.

Sir Andrew Barton, Lord High Admiral of Scotland, followed the example of his
father, who had been issued with letters of marque by James III of Scotland to
prey upon English and Portuguese shipping in 1485; the letters in due course
were reissued to the son. Barton was killed following an encounter with the
English in 1511.

Spain, militarily the big dog in those days, tried to stop piracy, but lost
its naval ships as a result.

> Sir Francis Drake, who had close contact with the sovereign, was responsible
for some damage to Spanish shipping, as well as attacks on Spanish settlements
in the Americas in the 16th century. He participated in the successful English
defence against the Spanish Armada in 1588, though he was also partly
responsible for the failure of the English Armada against Spain in 1589.

Sir George Clifford, 3rd Earl of Cumberland was a successful privateer against
Spanish shipping in the Caribbean. He is also famous for his short-lived 1598
capture of Fort San Felipe del Morro, the citadel protecting San Juan, Puerto
Rico. He arrived in Puerto Rico on June 15, 1598, but by November of that year
Clifford and his men had fled the island due to fierce civilian resistance. He
gained sufficient prestige from his naval exploits to be named the official
Champion of Queen Elizabeth I. Clifford became extremely wealthy through his
buccaneering, but lost most of his money gambling on horse races.

That brings us to today, when it is not possible to stop 'journal piracy'
without defeating Putin at war. Nature journal may have best recognized the
connection given how rabidly anti-Russian its editorial pages went over the
last few years (check - [Russian Government is Beheading Scientists in Red
Square Nature Reports](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/10/26/russian-
government-is-beheading-scientists-in-red-square-nature-reports/)).

That brings us to the war front of today, where NATO countries are fighting
against Russia/Iran/Syria through their ISIS proxy funded by USA/Turkey/Saudi
Arabia/Qatar. Based on latest news, the home team is losing badly and is
asking for a time-out.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/4RIvpEOAhKY" frameborder="0"> </iframe>

Maybe it is time for the journals to draft those scientists, who are staunch
believers of 'high impact factor' glam journals, and send to the war front :).

