---
title: Population Genetics of Ancient Jewish Population in India
tags:
- jewish
- population genetics
categories:
- blog
---
'Ancient' Bene Israel Jews and late-arrived Baghdadi Jews in India started the
Bollywood movie industry. Many famous early Indian actresses also came from
these communities. This is not common knowledge in India, because those
actresses took Muslim (Firoza Begum) or Hindu (Sulochana, Pramila) screen
names.
<!--more-->

Baghdadi Jews like [David
Sassoon](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Sassoon) also played big role in
establishing Bombay as a major trading center.

\--------------------------------------------------

A new population genetics study looks at the historic roots of the older (and
of more 'mysterious' root) among those two groups. Bene Israel Jews were at
times considered as one of the 'lost tribes'.

[The Genetics of Bene Israel from India Reveals Both Substantial Jewish and
Indian Ancestry](http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.p
one.0152056)

> The Bene Israel Jewish community from West India is a unique population
whose history before the 18th century remains largely unknown. Bene Israel
members consider themselves as descendants of Jews, yet the identity of Jewish
ancestors and their arrival time to India are unknown, with speculations on
arrival time varying between the 8th century BCE and the 6th century CE. Here,
we characterize the genetic history of Bene Israel by collecting and
genotyping 18 Bene Israel individuals. Combining with 486 individuals from 41
other Jewish, Indian and Pakistani populations, and additional individuals
from worldwide populations, we conducted comprehensive genome-wide analyses
based on FST, principal component analysis, ADMIXTURE, identity-by-descent
sharing, admixture linkage disequilibrium decay, haplotype sharing and allele
sharing autocorrelation decay, as well as contrasted patterns between the X
chromosome and the autosomes. The genetics of Bene Israel individuals resemble
local Indian populations, while at the same time constituting a clearly
separated and unique population in India. They are unique among Indian and
Pakistani populations we analyzed in sharing considerable genetic ancestry
with other Jewish populations. Putting together the results from all analyses
point to Bene Israel being an admixed population with both Jewish and Indian
ancestry, with the genetic contribution of each of these ancestral populations
being substantial. The admixture took place in the last millennium, about 1933
generations ago. It involved Middle-Eastern Jews and was sex-biased, with more
male Jewish and local female contribution. It was followed by a population
bottleneck and high endogamy, which can lead to increased prevalence of
recessive diseases in this population. This study provides an example of how
genetic analysis advances our knowledge of human history in cases where other
disciplines lack the relevant data to do so.

