---
title: UC Berkeley Plans to Dissolve Chemistry Department
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
We wrote a few days back - "[UC Berkeley is Running out of Money. Here is What
They Plan to Do](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2016/02/10/uc-berkeley-is-
running-out-of-money-here-is-what-they-plan-to-do/)." Looks like everything is
going according to the plan. The university plans to choose Option 2
('realignment') to get rid of chemistry department or rather its independent
and legendary 'college of chemistry'.
<!--more-->

Daily California reports -

[Campus considers dissolving the College of Chemistry to cut
costs](http://www.dailycal.org/2016/02/25/campus-considers-dissolving-college-
chemistry-cut-costs/)

> The campus is considering dissolving the College of Chemistry and
integrating it into another college as a cost-cutting measure.

The dissolution of the college is one of many options the administration is
considering as the campus faces a growing and unsustainable deficit, according
to campus spokesperson Dan Mogulof.

Science journal add further -

[Budget crunch could dissolve Berkeleys College of
Chemistry](http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2016/02/budget-crunch-could-
dissolve-berkeley-s-college-chemistry)

> The University of California (UC), Berkeley, is considering disbanding the
universitys College of Chemistry to help cope with a cash crunch at one of the
countrys most prominent public universities. According to an article in todays
Daily Californian, the universitys flagship campus is $150 million in debt,
and faced with flat income from tuition and rising costs. Though no decisions
have been made, closing the College of Chemistry and absorbing its departments
into other university colleges is just one of the many plans being considered
to save money.

Derek Lowe comments -

[Trouble At UC-
Berkeley](http://blogs.sciencemag.org/pipeline/archives/2016/03/01/trouble-at-
uc-berkeley)

> Berkeleys chemistry department is basically legendary, one of a select group
of chemistry departments in the country that can legitimately lay claim to
that adjective. Fundamental discoveries, great professors, Nobel Prizes,
influential graduates theyre all in evidence, and how. Breaking up the
department would seem to have no chance at all of improving it, and runs (youd
have to think) a very real risk of doing the opposite. Its true that the Cal
administration doesnt seem to be talking about that end of things at all just
the financials but whatever cost savings might be realized will have to be
weighed against the damage that will be done.

This is tragic, but not unexpected. Who needs chemistry, when we can have
apps, virtual reality and Nobel peace prizes? :)

