---
title: The Lab That Invented Nanopore Sequencing
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Yesterday, I attended an interesting talk by [Ian
Derrington](https://sharepoint.washington.edu/phys/people/Pages/view-
person.aspx?pid=387), who is currently working as a post-doctoral researcher
in the lab of [professor Jens Gundlach](http://depts.washington.edu/nanopore/)
at the University of Washington (UW). For those who do not know, Gundlach lab
is the first to identify and use MspA as an efficient pore molecule for
nanopore sequencing, and they published several key papers related to
development of the technology over the years. In my understanding, Illumina's
licensing of MspA-related patents from UW is the basis of their IP lawsuit
against Oxford Nanopore.
<!--more-->

I was planning to write about Ian's talk, but found an excellent video from
three years back to save me from the trouble. The talk in the youtube was
delivered by Jens Gundlach himself, and so I am including a somewhat unrelated
video of Ian and leaving our readers to do the hard part of combining the two
in their imagination :)

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/YBHglggIg9w" frameborder="0"> </iframe>

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/RT2iaU0NWoc" frameborder="0"> </iframe>


Above video of Gundlach is three years old, but the lab has been very active
in exploring new frontiers using their technology. Ian's talk included plenty
of materials about their recent (and very interesting) research. Those looking
for more information may start from their latest paper, where they used
nanopore as a single-molecule 'tweezer' !

[MspA nanopore as a single-molecule tool: From sequencing to
SPRNT](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1046202316300615)

> Single-molecule picometer resolution nanopore tweezers (SPRNT) is a new tool
for analyzing the motion of nucleic acids through molecular motors. With
SPRNT, individual enzymatic motions along DNA as small as 40 pm can be
resolved on sub-millisecond time scales. Additionally, SPRNT reveals an
enzymes exact location with respect to a DNA strands nucleotide sequence,
enabling identification of sequence-specific behaviors. SPRNT is enabled by a
mutant version of the biological nanopore formed by Mycobacterium smegmatis
porin A (MspA). SPRNT is strongly rooted in nanopore sequencing and therefore
requires a solid understanding of basic principles of nanopore sequencing.
Furthermore, SPRNT shares tools developed for nanopore sequencing and extends
them to analysis of single-molecule kinetics. As such, this review begins with
a brief history of our work developing the nanopore MspA for nanopore
sequencing. We then describe the underlying principles of SPRNT, how it works
in detail, and propose some potential future uses. We close with a comparison
of SPRNT to other techniques and we present the methods that will enable
others to use SPRNT.

