---
title: PLoS One Publishes Creationist Paper from Four Chinese Authors
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
A rather curious paper titled "[Biomechanical Characteristics of Hand
Coordination in Grasping Activities of Daily Living](http://journals.plos.org/
plosone/article/authors?id=10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0146193)" got published in
PLoS One. The paper has sensational texts, such as -
<!--more-->

> The explicit functional link indicates that the biomechanical characteristic
of tendinous connective architecture between muscles and articulations is the
proper design by the Creator to perform a multitude of daily tasks in a
comfortable way.

> Thus, hand coordination affords humans the ability to flexibly and
comfortably control the complex structure to perform numerous tasks. Hand
coordination should indicate the mystery of the Creators invention.

> In conclusion, our study can improve the understanding of the human hand and
confirm that the mechanical architecture is the proper design by the Creator
for dexterous performance of numerous functions following the evolutionary
remodeling of the ancestral hand for millions of years.

It is unclear, whether the authors are really Chinese or someone else chose
those fake names to publish, because google search does not give any trace of
them within their claimed organizations. In fact, first author's institute
("Institute of Rehabilitation and Medical Robotics") itself is not traceable.
Then again, historically people from China did show amazing ability to over-do
Christianity. In a famous example, [a gentleman claimed to be brother of Jesus
Christ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hong_Xiuquan), and started the most
disastrous civil war in China.

