---
title: The Heroes of CRISPR - Lander
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Eric Lander wrote [an excellent
article](http://www.cell.com/abstract/S0092-8674\(15\)01705-5) reviewing the
history of CRISPR. It is well-written and covers fascinating stories about the
early scientific work of some of the key players. A take-home message is that
unusual discoveries in basic science do not start from the heavily funded
famous labs. Kudos to Lander for recognizing the roles of young, unknown and
risk-taking scientists in pursuing such discoveries.
<!--more-->

The abstract and couple of examples of key contributors are posted below.

**Abstract**

> Three years ago, scientists reported that CRISPR technology can enable
precise and efficient genome editing in living eukaryotic cells. Since then,
the method has taken the scientific community by storm, with thousands of labs
using it for applications from biomedicine to agriculture. Yet, the preceding
20-year journeythe discovery of a strange microbial repeat sequence; its
recognition as an adaptive immune system; its biological characterization; and
its repurposing for genome engineeringremains little known. This Perspective
aims to fill in this backstorythe history of ideas and the stories of
pioneersand draw lessons about the remarkable ecosystem underlying scientific
discovery.

**Story of Mojica**

> The story starts in the Mediterranean port of Santa Pola on Spains Costa
Blanca, where the beautiful coast and vast salt marshes have for centuries
attracted vacationers, flamingoes, and commercial salt producers. (The
geography of the story is shown in Figure 2.) Francisco Mojica, who grew up
nearby, frequented those beaches, and it was no surprise that, when he began
his doctoral studies in 1989 at the University of Alicante, just up the coast,
he joined a laboratory working on Haloferax mediterranei, an archaeal microbe
with extreme salt tolerance that had been isolated from Santa Polas marshes.
His advisor had found that the salt concentration of the growth medium
appeared to affect the way in which restriction enzymes cut the microbes
genome, and Mojica set out to characterize the altered fragments. In the first
DNA fragment he examined, Mojica found a curious structuremultiple copies of a
near-perfect, roughly palindromic, repeated sequence of 30 bases, separated by
spacers of roughly 36 basesthat did not resemble any family of repeats known
in microbes (Mojica et al., 1993).

The 28-year-old graduate student was captivated and devoted the next decade of
his career to unraveling the mystery.He soon discovered similar repeats in the
closely related H. volcanii, as well as in more distant halophilic archaea.
Combing through the scientific literature, he also spotted a connection with
eubacteria: a paper by a Japanese group (Ishino et al., 1987) had mentioned a
repeat sequence in Escherichia coli that had a similar structure, although no
sequence similarity, to the Haloferax repeats. These authors had made little
of the observation, but Mojica realized that the presence of such similar
structures in such distant microbes must signal an important function in
prokaryotes. He wrote up a paper reporting this new class of repeats (Mojica
et al., 1995) before heading off for a short post-doctoral stint at Oxford.

**Story of Horvath**

Lander managed to get the word 'sexy' approved in scientific journal in
describing thesis, which itself is another major achievement :)

> Like Mojica, Philippe Horvath could hardly have chosen a thesis

topic that was more local or less sexy. As a Ph.D. student at the University
of Strasbourg, he concentrated on the genetics of a lactic-acid bacteria used
in the production of sauerkrautthe central ingredient in the Alsatian
specialty choucroute garnie. Given his interest in food science, Horvath
skipped doing postdoctoral research and in late 2000 joined Rhodia Food, a
maker of bacterial starter cultures located in Dange -Saint-Romain in western
France, to set up its first molecular biology lab. The company was later
acquired by the Danish firm Danisco, which was itself acquired by DuPont in
2011.

Rhodia Food was interested in Horvaths microbiological skills because other
lactic-acid bacteria, such as Streptococcus thermophilus, are used to make
dairy products, such as yogurt and cheese. Horvaths mission included
developing DNA-based methods for precise identification of bacterial strains
and overcoming

the frequent phage infections that plagued industrial cultures used in dairy
fermentation. Understanding how certain S. thermophilus strains protect
themselves from phage attack was thus of both scientific interest and economic
importance.

**The lessons of CRISPR**

> The story of CRISPR is rich with lessons about the human ecosystem that
produces scientific advances, with relevance to funding agencies, the general
public, and aspiring researchers. The most important is thatmedical
breakthroughs often emerge from completely unpredictable origins. The early
heroes of CRISPR were not on a quest to edit the human genomeor even to study
human disease. Theirmotivations were amix of personal curiosity (to understand
bizarre repeat sequences in salttolerant microbes), military exigency (to
defend against biological warfare), and industrial application (to improve
yogurt production). The history also illustrates the growing role in biology
of hypothesis-free discovery based on big data. The discovery of the CRISPR
loci, their biological function, and the tracrRNA all emerged not from wet-
bench experiments but from openended bioinformatic exploration of large-scale,
often public, genomic datasets. Hypothesis-driven science of course remains
essential, but the 21st century will see an increasing partnership between
these two approaches.

It is instructive that so many of the Heroes of CRISPR did their seminal work
near the very start of their scientific careers (including Mojica, Horvath,
Marraffini, Charpentier, Vogel, and Zhang)in several cases, before the age of
30. With youth often comes a willingness to take riskson uncharted directions
and seemingly obscure questionsand a drive to succeed. Its an important
reminder at a time that the median age for first grants from the NIH has crept
up to 42.

Notably, too, many did their landmark work in places that some might regard as
off the beaten path of science (Alicante, Spain; Frances Ministry of Defense;
Daniscos corporate labs; and Vilnius, Lithuania). And, their seminal papers
were often rejected by leading journalsappearing only after considerable delay
and in less prominent venues. These observations may not be a coincidence: the
settings may have afforded greater freedom to pursue less trendy topics but
less support about how to overcome skepticism by journals and reviewers.

Finally, the narrative underscores that scientific breakthroughs are rarely
eureka moments. They are typically ensemble acts, played out over a decade or
more, in which the cast becomes part of something greater than what any one of
them could do alone. Its a wonderful lesson for the general public, as well as
for a young person contemplating a life in science.

