---
title: Organoids and the Coming Medical Revolution - (ii)
tags:
- organoid
- human health
categories:
- blog
---
Previous segment - [Organoids and the Coming Medical Revolution
(i)](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2016/05/09/organoids-and-the-coming-
medical-revolution/)
<!--more-->

In 2006, Yamanaka surprised the whole world by announcing that he could turn
adult mouse fibroblasts into pluripotent stem cells by applying four
transcription factors - **Sox2, Oct4, Klf4 and c-Myc**. Those pluripotent stem
cells can then be converted to any other cell lineage of the body.

To fully appreciate the significance of Yamanaka's discovery, you need to also
consider the political climate of 2006. The human genome assembly was
completed around 2000-2001, and the researchers were looking for ways to use
the genome to improve human health. Stem cell research was recognized as a
potentially beneficial area, but [work on human embryonic stem cells also got
associated with killing
babies](http://www.pbs.org/wnet/religionandethics/2006/07/21/july-21-2006-dr-
francis-collins/15186/). So, Federal funding stopped for using human embryonic
stem cells in research. To add to complications, the research institutes had
to build separate facilities to isolate federally funded research from human
stem cell research from other funding.

2006 being an election year, Bush made a big deal of vetoing a stem cell bill
to hide his Iraq war failure.

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/Capture-
150x141.jpg)

>

**Stem Cell Bill Gets Bush's First Veto**

By Charles Babington

Washington Post Staff Writer

Thursday, July 20, 2006

President Bush issued the first veto of his five-year-old administration
yesterday, rejecting Congress's bid to lift funding restrictions on human
embryonic stem cell research and underscoring his party's split on an
emotional issue in this fall's elections.

At a White House ceremony where he was joined by children produced from what
he called "adopted" frozen embryos, Bush said taxpayers should not support
research on surplus embryos at fertility clinics, even if they offer possible
medical breakthroughs and are slated for disposal.

The vetoed bill "would support the taking of innocent human life in the hope
of finding medical benefits for others," the president said, as babies cooed
and cried behind him. "It crosses a moral boundary that our decent society
needs to respect." Each child on the stage, he said, "began his or her life as
a frozen embryo that was created for in vitro fertilization but remained
unused after the fertility treatments were complete. . . . These boys and
girls are not spare parts."

Within hours of Bush's announcement, the House, as expected, fell short in a
bid to override the veto, extinguishing the issue as a legislative matter this
year but not as a political matter. Democrats said voters will penalize GOP
candidates for the demise of a popular measure, and predicted the issue could
trigger the defeat of Bush allies such as Sen. James M. Talent, who faces a
tough reelection battle in Missouri.

Yamanaka's discovery came as a big sign of relief, because turning one's skin
cells or other cells back into (induced) pluripotent stem cells by applying
enzymes bypassed those ethical questions. The action was equivalent to using a
time machine on a developed cell and turning the clock back. Books of moral
dilemma do not have a chapter on negative time actions.

Readers will enjoy the following interview of Yamanaka, where he talked about
his amazing discovery.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/--o1aux_htA" frameborder="0"> </iframe>

What inspired him to choose those four transcription factors? More on that
topic in the following post, but here is a hint (h/t: Developmental Biology)

![CiGox7ZWkAA9c8y](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2016/05
/CiGox7ZWkAA9c8y-150x150.jpg)

