---
title: Transistors, Translation and tRNAs
tags:
- philosophy
- social
categories:
- blog
---
Prior to 1960s, most computers were [analog
computers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Analog_computer).
<!--more-->

> World War II era gun directors, gun data computers, and bomb sights used
mechanical analog computers. Mechanical analog computers were very important
in gun fire control in World War II, The Korean War and well past the Vietnam
War; they were made in significant numbers.

The FERMIAC was an analog computer invented by physicist Enrico Fermi in 1947
to aid in his studies of neutron transport.[12] Project Cyclone was an analog
computer developed by Reeves in 1950 for the analysis and design of dynamic
systems.[13] Project Typhoon was an analog computer developed by RCA in 1952.
It consisted of over 4000 electron tubes and used 100 dials and 6000 plug-in
connectors to program.[14] The MONIAC Computer was a hydraulic model of a
national economy first unveiled in 1949.

![220px-Analog_Computing_Machine_GPN-2000-000354](http://www.homolog.us/blogs
/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/220px-
Analog_Computing_Machine_GPN-2000-000354-150x150.jpg)

In those years, many universities and companies were building analog
computers, although there were [rare
exceptions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ENIAC).

>

Computer Engineering Associates was spun out of Caltech in 1950 to provide
commercial services using the "Direct Analogy Electric Analog Computer" ("the
largest and most impressive general-purpose analyzer facility for the solution
of field problems") developed there by Gilbert D. McCann, Charles H. Wilts,
and Bart Locanthi.[15][16]

Educational analog computers illustrated the principles of analog calculation.
The Heathkit EC-1, a $199 educational analog computer, was made by the Heath
Company, USA c. 1960.[17] It was programmed using patch cords that connected
nine operational amplifiers and other components.[18] General Electric also
marketed an "educational" analog computer kit of a simple design in the early
1960s consisting of a two transistor tone generator and three potentiometers
wired such that the frequency of the oscillator was nulled when the
potentiometer dials were positioned by hand to satisfy an equation. The
relative resistance of the potentiometer was then equivalent to the formula of
the equation being solved. Multiplication or division could be performed
depending on which dials were considered inputs and which was the output.
Accuracy and resolution was limited and a simple slide rule was more accurate;
however, the unit did demonstrate the basic principle.

Analog computers are completely gone from the scene today, and the transition
happened in several phases. In 1930s, Alan Turing developed the mathematical
principles of [an abstract digital
machine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turing_machine) to show that it could
do arbitrary calculations. A number of digital machines were built in the 40s
and 50s, but the big transition could start only after the [invention of
silicon integrated circuits](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integrated_circuit)
of [complementary-symmetry metaloxidesemiconductor (CMOS) or MOSFET
switches](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CMOS). This is the predominant
technology today.

However, despite such prevalence of digital computers everywhere, the analog
world exists and it exists right beneath the digital circuitry. Think about it
this way. If the natural world (of silicon materials) is analog and the
computer is digital, the transition from analog to digital must happen
somewhere, right? That transition is carefully hidden inside the MOSFET.

Between 1997-2000, I worked at a semiconductor company, and the task of our
group was to hide the analog world from those, who did not want to face it.
The task gets increasingly difficult with every round of miniaturization,
because all elements of the circuit including n- and p-transistors, gate
capacitors and even electrical wires connecting them start to remind the world
that the analog world exists.

\-----------------------------------------------------------------------

![nature-landscapes_widewallpaper_amazon-
forest_2915](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/nature-
landscapes_widewallpaper_amazon-forest_2915-150x150.jpg)

Switching to the other side of the living world, Darwin's model of evolution
was entirely analog. Darwin was not aware of Mendel's discovery of 'genes',
which introduced discreteness into evolution.

Biologists did not find out about Mendel's experiment until ~1900s and then a
huge conflict ensued between those, who sided with Darwin's continuous
evolution and those, who sided with Mendel's discrete evolution.

> Mendel's results were quickly replicated, and genetic linkage quickly worked
out. Biologists flocked to the theory; even though it was not yet applicable
to many phenomena, it sought to give a genotypic understanding of heredity
which they felt was lacking in previous studies of heredity which focused on
phenotypic approaches. Most prominent of these previous approaches was the
biometric school of Karl Pearson and W. F. R. Weldon, which was based heavily
on statistical studies of phenotype variation. The strongest opposition to
this school came from William Bateson, who perhaps did the most in the early
days of publicising the benefits of Mendel's theory (the word "genetics", and
much of the discipline's other terminology, originated with Bateson). This
debate between the biometricians and the Mendelians was extremely vigorous in
the first two decades of the twentieth century, with the biometricians
claiming statistical and mathematical rigor,[37] whereas the Mendelians
claimed a better understanding of biology.[38][39] (Modern genetics shows that
Mendelian heredity is in fact an inherently biological process, though not all
genes of Mendel's experiments are yet understood.)[40][41]

![Youngronaldfisher2](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2016/05/Youngronaldfisher2-150x150.jpg)

Fisher's mathematics (1920s and 30s) brought those two camps together, and
then the series of discoveries (1950s and 60s) starting with Watson-Crick's
solving of DNA structure further confirmed the existence of digital
information layer in every living organism. Since then research in the living
world moved together with the technological advances in the computing world.
Advances in digital technology allowed better experimentation on living world,
and those experiments focused more on genetics and genomics. As a result, we
learned a lot about how the information layer of living organisms evolved over
time and plan to learn more through the completion of 10,000 insect genome
project, 1,000 fish transcriptome project and various other comparative
sequencing projects.

However, when you compare the two narratives, do you notice something missing
from the second one? In case of the semiconductor industry, a dedicated group
hides the existence of analog world from vast majority of practitioners, but
who does so for the living world? Moreover, where is the analog connection of
information layer of life hidden?

As you can guess from the title, the answer most likely lies in 'translation'
and 'tRNAs'. How so will be the topic of another commentary.

