---
title: 'Suicide Epidemic: Since NIH-funded Clowns Do Not Want to Discuss It, We Will'
tags:
- NIH failure
- human health
- suicide
categories:
- blog
---
A large number of [NIH-funded parasites waste taxpayers'
money](https://twitter.com/joe_pickrell) with the excuse that they are working
toward improving the health of Americans. Francis Collins, the head of NIH,
uses every opportunity to tell everyone how research funded by NIH helps in
improving the life expectancy of Americans (a flat out lie). Yet, when
research by Deaton and Case uncovered that the life expectancy of Americans of
prime age (45-54) was falling, primarily due to rising suicides, Collins and
his minions went completely silent.
<!--more-->

We have not come across a single major science journal or blog giving enough
space on this health epidemic spreading rapidly. Also, the word epidemic is
appropriate given the rising global trend. For example,

**New Zealand:** [Suicide toll reaches highest rate since records kept](http://www.stuff.co.nz/national/health/69920289/Suicide-toll-reaches-highest-rate-since-records-kept)

**Canada:** [Whats Behind The Surge In Suicide Attempts Among Canadas Indigenous Population 

_More than 100 of Attawapiskats 2,000 members have tried to end their lives in
the last seven months, including 11 youth on Saturday alone._

The following thoughtful essay from ['The Automatic Earth'
blog](http://www.theautomaticearth.com/2016/05/finance-stress-suicide/) shines
some light on what is going on in New Zealand.

\-------------------------------------------------------------------

**Finance + Stress = Suicide**

**_Nelson Lebo: _** Our already horrendous suicide rate hit a new record high last year. The news of New Zealand's suicide rate did not surprise me when I heard it on the radio earlier this week. Anyone who pays attention to global trends could see this coming. Psychotherapists say we need a wide-ranging review into the mental health system before there are more preventable deaths reported Newstalk ZB. 

At lighter moments I joke that the best thing about living in New Zealand is
that you can see worldwide trends that are heading this way, but the worst
part is that no-one believes you. This is not a lighter moment. Suicide is a
serious issue and one that is growing dramatically among my peer group: white
middle-aged men.

The first people to notice the emerging pattern in the United States were
Princeton economists Angus Deaton and Anne Case. The New York Times reported
on 2nd November, 2015 that the researchers had uncovered a surprising shift in
life expectancy among middle-aged white Americans - what traditionally would
have been considered the most privileged demographic group on the planet.

The researchers analyzed mountains of data from the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention as well as other sources. As reported by the Times,
_they concluded that rising annual death rates among this group are being
driven not by the big killers like heart disease and diabetes but by an
epidemic of suicides and afflictions stemming from substance abuse: alcoholic
liver disease and overdoses of heroin and prescription opioids. The mortality
rate for whites 45 to 54 years old with no more than a high school education
increased by 134 deaths per 100,000 people from 1999 to 2014. _

The most amazing thing about this discovery is that the Princeton researchers
stumbled across these findings while looking into other issues of health and
disability. But as we hear so often, everything is connected. A month before
releasing this finding Dr. Deaton was awarded the Nobel Prize in Economics
based on a long career researching wealth and income inequality, health and
well-being, and consumption patterns.

The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences credited Dr. Deaton for contributing
significantly to policy planning that has the potential to reduce rather than
aggravate wealth inequality. In other words, to make good decisions policy
writers need good research based on good data. Too often this is not the case.
_To design economic policy that promotes welfare and reduces poverty, we must
first understand individual consumption choices. More than anyone else, Angus
Deaton has enhanced this understanding._

Days before hearing the news about New Zealand's rising suicide rate I learned
of another major finding from demographic researchers in the United States.
For the first time in history the life expectancy of white American women had
decreased, due primarily to drug overdose, suicide and alcoholism. This point
is worth repeating as it marks a watershed moment for white American women.
After seeing life expectancies continually extend throughout the history of
the nation, the trend has not only slowed but reversed. Data show the slip is
only one month, but the fact that it's a decrease instead of another increase
should be taken as significant milestone.

Please note that the following sentence is not meant in the least to make
light of the situation, but is simply stating a fact. The demographic groups
that are experiencing the highest rates of drug overdose, suicide and
alcoholism are also the most likely to be supporters of Donald Trump in his
campaign for the U.S. Presidency. It does not take a Nobel Laureate to observe
a high level of distress among white middle-class Americans. Trump simply taps
into that angst.

As reported by CBS News, _The fabulously rich candidate becomes the hero of
working-class people by identifying with their economic distress. That formula
worked for Franklin D. Roosevelt in the 1930s. Today, Donald Trump's campaign
benefits from a similar populist appeal to beleaguered, white, blue-collar
voters - his key constituency._

I don't blame most Americans for being angry. That the very architects of the
global financial crisis have only become richer and more powerful since they
crashed the world economy in 2008 is unforgivable. The gap between rich and
poor continues to widen and the chasm has now engulfed white middle-aged
workers. As the Pope consistently tells us, wealth and income inequality is
the greatest threat to humanity alongside climate change.

Instead of going down the Trump track for the rest of this piece, I'd rather
wrap it up by bringing the issue back to Aotearoa (New Zealand) and my small
provincial city of Whanganui. To provide some background for international
readers, the NZ economy relies significantly on dairy exports and many dairy
farmers hold large debts. Dairy prices are known for their volatility, and
recently the payouts have dropped below break-even points for many farmers.

Earlier this month Primary Industries Minister Nathan Guy announced that the
government would invest $175,000 to study innovative, low cost, high
performing farming systems already in place in New Zealand. Stuff.co.nz
reported, _The government is set to pick the brains of New Zealand's top dairy
farmers in an effort to help those struggling with the low dairy payout. _

That is great news, but the government's investment in researching the best of
the best farmers is a pittance when compared with what is spent addressing
issues of depression and suicide prevention among Kiwi farmers. Isn't this a
case of putting the cart ahead of the horse, or treating symptoms instead of
causes?

Research shows that financial stress contributes significantly to the
increasing suicide rates here and abroad. We know that innovative farmers who
use low-input/high-performance systems are more profitable that their
conventional farming brethren. Would it then be a stretch to conclude that
depression and suicide is much lower among these innovative and profitable
farmers? At the same time, research shows that wealth and income inequality in
our more urban centres contribute to anti-social behaviours such as crime,
domestic abuse and illegal drug usage.

Angus Deaton, the Nobel-winning economist, would argue that in order for
policy planners to address these issues effectively they must understand the
underlying causes and resultant costs. Thankfully, we do see glimmers of that
from central government instead of the usual neoliberal claptrap. Credit must
be given to Finance Minister Bill English for his actuarial approach to some
social issues rather than the inaccurate dogmatic position often adopted by
the right.

But closer to home for me, such enlightened policy planning has yet to reach
our city by the _awa_ (river). To start off, the Council's rates structure is
stunningly regressive, clearly taking significantly higher proportions of
household wealth from low-income families than from high-income families. If
we believe the research in this field (ie, _The Spirit Level_, etc) wouldn't
we expect the widening gap between rich and poor to result in even more anti-
social behavior in our city that already suffers from reputation problems
nationwide?

Secondly, the council's vision documents and long-term plan are nearly devoid
of intelligent strategies to address the underlying issues of anti-social
behaviour, depression, poor health, and domestic problems that afflict our
community. The Council pours mountains of money into an art gallery and arts
events while providing token services and events for low-income families.

Will it take our own Trump or Sanders running for office to stimulate a
populist revolt against regressive policies that potentially do more harm than
good to our community? What will it take for us to finally get it? I first
wrote about these issues in our city's newspaper, the _Chronicle_, two and a
half years ago but, apparently, no one believed me. Welcome to provincial New
Zealand!

