---
title: Is Seven Bridges Genomics Patenting All Existing Bioinformatics?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Bioinformaticians are up in arms after learning that Boston-based Seven
Bridges Genomics and a sponsor of Titus Brown's lab is trying to patent their
published work. Zamin Iqbal pointed out in Twitter that the company applied
for patent (in 2015) for graph-based alignment method that Weigel lab
published in 2009. Michael Hoffman found out that Galaxyproject is also up for
patenting.
<!--more-->

![Capture2](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2016/02/Capture2-4-300x252.jpg)

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2016/02/Capture-9-300x64.jpg)

Those twitter exchanges got Titus Brown defensive because of his financial
ties with the company. Unlike his loud complaints about [Kallisto's non-free
license](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/07/10/will-i-use-kallisto-
definitely-most-likely-and-never/) (which Lior Pachter had every right to
issue), this time his tweets seemed to be in support of the company.

In other news, leading scientist Tom Daschle [joined the board of the
company](http://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20160216005439/en/Bridges-
Announces-45-Million-Series-Funding). Apparently, his connections with NIH
will help the company win business. Daschle was nominated by Obama to be the
HHS secretary in 2009, but had to quit after a 'series of errors' in his tax
filing were discovered.

> Daschle, the former Senate majority leader, apologized Monday for failing to
pay his taxes in full. He said earlier he was "deeply embarrassed" for a
series of errors that included failing to report $15,000 in charitable
donations, unreported car service and more than $80,000 in unreported income
from consulting.

For a full list of patent applications from Seven Bridges, you can check
[here](http://www.faqs.org/patents/assignee/seven-bridges-genomics-inc/).

> Patent application number Title Published

20150227685 SYSTEMS AND METHODS FOR ANALYZING SEQUENCE DATA - The invention
provides methods for comparing one set of genetic sequences to another without
discarding any information within either set. A set of genetic sequences is
represented using a directed acyclic graph (DAG) avoiding any unwarranted
reduction to a linear data structure. The invention provides a way to align
one sequence DAG to another to produce an alignment that can itself be stored
as a DAG. DAG-to-DAG alignment is a natural choice wherever a set of genomic
information consisting of more than one string needs to be compared to any
non-linear reference. For example, a subpopulation DAG could be compared to a
population DAG in order to compare the genetic features of that subpopulation
to those of the population. 08-13-2015

20150112658 SYSTEMS AND METHODS FOR TRANSCRIPTOME ANALYSIS - The invention
generally provides systems and methods for analysis of RNA-Seq reads in which
an annotated reference is represented as a directed acyclic graph (DAG) or
similar data structure. Features such as exons and introns from the reference
provide nodes in the DAG and those features are linked as pairs in their
canonical genomic order by edges. The DAG can scale to any size and can in
fact be populated in the first instance by import from an extrinsic annotated
reference. 04-23-2015

20150112602 SYSTEMS AND METHODS FOR USING PAIRED-END DATA IN DIRECTED ACYCLIC
STRUCTURE - Methods of analyzing a transcriptome that involves obtaining at
least one pair of paired-end reads from a transcriptome from an organism,
finding an alignment with an optimal score between a first read of the pair
and a node in a directed acyclic data structure (the data structure has nodes
representing RNA sequences such as exons or transcripts and edges connecting
pairs of nodes), identifying candidate paths that include the node connected
to a downstream node by a path having a length substantially similar to an
insert length of the pair of paired-end reads, and aligning the paired-end
rends to the candidate paths to determine an optimal-scoring alignment.
04-23-2015

20150066383 COLLAPSIBLE MODULAR GENOMIC PIPELINE - The invention generally
relates to tools for genomic analysis and particularly to a pipeline editor
that can turn pipelines into standalone tools for use in other pipelines. The
invention provides systems and methods for genomic analysis in which
individual analytical tools can be arranged into analytical pipelines that can
then be collapsed into standalone tools, which themselves can be put into the
pool of individual tools for use in further building of pipelines. Aspects of
the invention provide a system that includes a server computer system operable
to present to a user a plurality of genomic tools, receive input from the user
arranging the tools into a pipeline, create a new tool that includes the
pipeline, and offer the new tool along with the plurality of genomic tools.
03-05-2015

20150057946 METHODS AND SYSTEMS FOR ALIGNING SEQUENCES - The invention
includes methods for aligning reads (e.g., nucleic acid reads, amino acid
reads) to a reference sequence construct, methods for building the reference
sequence construct, and systems that use the alignment methods and constructs
to produce sequences. The method is scalable, and can be used to align
millions of reads to a construct thousands of bases or amino acids long. The
invention additionally includes methods for identifying a disease or a
genotype based upon alignment of nucleic acid reads to a location in the
construct. 02-26-2015

20150056613 METHODS AND SYSTEMS FOR DETECTING SEQUENCE VARIANTS - The
invention provides methods for identifying rare variants near a structural
variation in a genetic sequence, for example, in a nucleic acid sample taken
from a subject. The invention additionally includes methods for aligning reads
(e.g., nucleic acid reads) to a reference sequence construct accounting for
the structural variation, methods for building a reference sequence construct
accounting for the structural variation or the structural variation and the
rare variant, and systems that use the alignment methods to identify rare
variants. The method is scalable, and can be used to align millions of reads
to a construct thousands of bases long, or longer.

We expect those to be just the appetizer on what to come, because the company
is still [trying to hire more patent
writers](https://jobs.jobvite.com/sevenbridges/job/oApx1fwh).

> Position

At Seven Bridges our dedicated R&D; and scientific teams are expanding the
frontiers of bioinformatics, developing cutting edge tools and methods based
on novel insights at the intersection of math, computer science, and biology.
Immersed in the latest scientific breakthrough and publications, you would
play a crucial role in keeping this innovation engine running by securing
legal recognition for our inventions and building a bulwark of intellectual
property to match our established competitors.

As a patent technical writer you would be involved in all stages of the patent
process at Seven Bridges. You would work with our product and engineering
teams to identify patentable inventions and apply your knowledge of the patent
system, our product, and our competitive environment to determine which
inventions to seek patent protection for. You would then draft disclosures
describing inventions with the assistance of their inventors, review patent
applications drafted by patent counsel on the basis of these disclosures, and
assist patent counsel and internal decision-makers in making strategic
judgments throughout the application process.

An ideal candidate would have

bachelor's degree

experience in math, computer science, or computational biology

ability to produce professional documents

strong organizational skills

And we also think that

2+ years experience working with the patent system, ideally working on
drafting and patent prosecution, is a plus

technical writing experience is a plus

familiarity with computer science and software engineering is a plus

We are also looking for a strong cultural fit, as we value our team more than
anything else and we like to learn from each other and share the knowledge. In
return, we offer a relaxed and open work environment, great work conditions,
and first-hand involvement in one of the most exciting fields of science that
is laying down the foundations of modern personalized medicine.

If you would like to help us advance genomics at our leading, well-funded, and
dynamic startup, please apply here. Thank you for your interest in Seven
Bridges Genomics, however, due to the high volume of submissions we will only
contact those candidates whose skills and qualifications most closely suit our
needs.

