---
title: Quasi-essential genes supporting yet undiscovered functions for life?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Venter's group published a new paper on minimal genome.
<!--more-->

[Design and synthesis of a minimal bacterial
genome](http://science.sciencemag.org/content/351/6280/aad6253)

> A goal in biology is to understand the molecular and biological function of
every gene in a cell. One way to approach this is to build a minimal genome
that includes only the genes essential for life. In 2010, a 1079-kb genome
based on the genome of Mycoplasma mycoides (JCV-syn1.0) was chemically
synthesized and supported cell growth when transplanted into cytoplasm.
Hutchison III et al. used a design, build, and test cycle to reduce this
genome to 531 kb (473 genes). The resulting JCV-syn3.0 retains genes involved
in key processes such as transcription and translation, but also contains 149
genes of unknown function.

What do those 149 genes do? The authors suggest existence of undiscovered
functions essential for life.

> Conclusion: The minimal cell concept appears simple at first glance but
becomes more complex upon close inspection. In addition to essential and
nonessential genes, there are many quasi-essential genes, which are not
absolutely critical for viability but are nevertheless required for robust
growth. Consequently, during the process of genome minimization, there is a
trade-off between genome size and growth rate. JCVI-syn3.0 is a working
approximation of a minimal cellular genome, a compromise between small genome
size and a workable growth rate for an experimental organism. It retains
almost all the genes that are involved in the synthesis and processing of
macromolecules. **Unexpectedly, it also contains 149 genes with unknown
biological functions, suggesting the presence of undiscovered functions that
are essential for life.** JCVI-syn3.0 is a versatile platform for
investigating the core functions of life and for exploring whole-genome
design.

Readers may also enjoy the discussions on the paper in 'In the Pipeline' blog
-

[The Smallest Viable Genome Is Very
Weird](http://blogs.sciencemag.org/pipeline/archives/2016/03/28/the-smallest-
viable-genome-is-very-weird)

> Think about that for a minute. One third of this stripped-down minimialist
genome is still made of of genes that we dont understand. There are some
kinases and hydrolases, etc., whose substrates, products, and functions are
unknown, but there are some that are just big question marks. Clearly we have
some work to do if there are so many fundamental processes that arent even
annotated. Even the annotated ones can be mysterious, though to pick one
example, the organism still has six different efflux pathways, and the paper
notes that It is somewhat disconcerting to imagine that all of these exclude
or remove toxic substances. And some of the genes even in this organism may
still be overlapping, because theyve noted a number of synthetic lethal pairs
redundant genes that look like they can be eliminated if you take one of them
out, but are fatal if both are removed. The biggest design challenges for this
organism, the paper says, was working through these and figuring out what had
gone wrong in each case. Theyre still not sure how many redundant genes are
present.

> Interestingly, they also tried defragmenting a large stretch of this genome,
placing similar functions next to each other in an orderly arrangement. This
rationalized organism was viable, and grew at basically the same rate as the
other one, showing that at least at this level, a good deal of genetic
rearrangement can take place without having that much effect. (This makes me
wonder, a little bit, about the huge-stretches-of-noncoding-DNA-are-vital-
because-theyre-scaffolding argument).

