---
title: 'Job Opening - Postdoctoral Scholar: Forest Genomics Database and Software
  Developer'
tags:
- job
- university
categories:
- blog
---
(From one of our readers)
<!--more-->

**TITLE**

Postdoctoral Scholar: Forest Genomics Database and Software Developer

**LOCATION**

University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA

**URL**

http://compgenomics.lab.uconn.edu/

**START DATE**: ASAP 

**DURATION**: Full-time 

**POSITION SUMMARY**

The Plant Computational Genomics laboratory at University of Connecticut
(Storrs, CT) has an opening for a database and software developer position as
part of a collaborative project involving researchers from all of the world.
This person will take a lead role in the continued development of the
TreeGenes database and the CartograTree application (treegenesdb.org and
cartogratree.org). These resources serve vast amounts of genomic, phenotypic,
and environmental data to the user community. In addition, we are committed to
providing greater collaboration and data sharing among partner databases
through Galaxy modules, and new analysis/visualization platforms.

**DESCRIPTION OF DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES**

The successful candidate will work as part of a small interdisciplinary team
of bioinformaticians and data curators. Tasks will include maintenance of the
existing database, developing connections to collaborating databases,
improving the user experience (interface development) and the implementation
of novel analysis and visualization tools. The Postdoctoral Scholar will be
provided with training opportunities and will attend conferences to
present/train users on these new tools. In addition, publications on specific
software products will result.

**QUALIFICATIONS**

The qualified applicant will have a PhD degree in Bioinformatics, Information
Systems, Computer Science, or a related field. Biology/Bioinformatics
experience is essential as well as previous experience with web/database
development. The applicant should have strong knowledge of Java (Struts/JSP)
and JavaScript (jQuery). Experience with Linux/Unix, scripting languages
(Python), and relational databases (PostgreSQL).

**HOW TO APPLY**

Please send the following THREE documents: cover letter, research statement,
and CV to: jill.wegrzyn@uconn.edu Applications will be accepted until June
10th or until the position is filled.

\--------------------------------------------------

Readers may note the previous opening from the same research group [posted
here in January](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2016/01/17/job-opening-
computational-biologistbioinformatics-scientist/).

