---
title: Illumina's 'Surprise' Announcement is not Surprising
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
_Disclaimer: The following post is not financial advice. It is only for
entertainment purpose._
<!--more-->

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2016/04/Capture-1-300x175.jpg)

Illumina stock crashed two days back due to 'unanticipated' weakness in
Europe. Wall Street Journal writes -

[Illumina Shares Take Hit on Weakness in Europe](http://www.wsj.com/articles
/illumina-shares-take-hit-on-weakness-in-europe-1461090378)

> Shares plunged 24% to $135.46 in midday trading in New York, a decline that
would erase roughly $6 billion of the companys market value in one day if the
stock closes at that level. Analysts said the companys revenue forecast could
reflect a misread of the market environment in Europe and that Illumina is
likely to be alone among its peers in posting underwhelming results on the
region.

Illumina, the maker of gene-sequencing machines, said Monday that sales of its
HiSeq 2500, 3000 and 4000 instruments were lower than anticipated in Europe,
resulting in management changes in the region. The company blamed greater-
than-expected outsourcing, which analysts said could reflect more lab and
equipment sharing. The company also pointed to fewer upgrades of older
instruments.

However, the above phenomenon should not surprise our readers, who were warned
repeatedly of the possibility of over-investment and saturation in the
sequencing space.

Mar 21, 2016: [Is Huge Business Downturn Coming in the Sequencing
Industry?](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/10/09/is-illumina-at-a
-strategic-inflection-point/)

Feb 13, 2016 (mentioned Illumina to make the case): [Our #AGBT16 Forecast
Oxford Nanopore Will Go Out of Business by
2017](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2016/02/13/our-agbt16-forecast-oxford-
nanopore-will-go-out-of-business-by-2017/)

Nov 24, 2015: [Peak Sequencing Consequence? BGI Delays Launch of Nation-scale
Sequencer](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/11/24/peak-sequencing-
consequence-bgi-delays-launch-of-nation-scale-sequencer/)

Oct 31, 2015: [Happy Halloween Says Illumina
Stock](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/10/31/happy-halloween-says-
illumina-stock/)

Jun 6, 2015: [Peak Sequencing? BGI Unveils Nation-scale
Sequencer](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/06/09/peak-sequencing-bgi-
unveils-nation-scale-sequencer/)

Readers may note that Illumina stock peaked within weeks of our 'peak
sequencing' post.

Although our posts are for entertainment purpose only, we like to point out
that other publications in serious investment business are telling their
readers to buy Illumina stocks.

Barrons (Apr 21): [Illumina Selloff Offers a Good Buying
Opportunity](http://www.barrons.com/articles/illumina-selloff-offers-a-good-
buying-opportunity-1461093774)

[You need to pay to see their advice]

Motley Fool (Apr 21): [Are Illumina's Shares Worth Buying on This
Drop?](http://www.fool.com/investing/general/2016/04/19/are-illuminas-shares-
worth-buying-on-this-drop.aspx)

> Do the competitive threats and European uncertainty make Illumina too risky
to buy right now? Not necessarily. Clearly, investors need more insight into
why Europe's growth is slowing, but assuming it's not related to competitors,
there's enough to like about Illumina to think a sell-off could be temporary.
After all, Illumina remains the market share leader in a lucrative and fast-
growing industry, and given Illumina's well established leadership position
and its R&D; depth, picking up its shares when they're trading on sale could
be a savvy long-term decision.

We also pointed out [in an earlier
post](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/10/09/is-illumina-at-a-strategic-
inflection-point/) that the geniuses from MIT and Forbes were extremely
bullish on Illumina right at the peak.

> Things were quite opposite a few months back, when one had to [search
hard](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/09/21/end-illumina-era/) to find
anything negative about the company. All geniuses everywhere predicted sunny
skies, be it Matthew Harper, Luke Timmerman or MIT Tech Review.

[DNA Sequencing Market Will Exceed $20 Billion, Says Illumina CEO Jay Flatley  

[MIT technology review - Illumina is the smartest
company](http://www.technologyreview.com/featuredstory/524531/why-illumina-is-
no-1/)

[Inside Illuminas Plans to Lure Consumers with an App Store for
Genomes](http://www.technologyreview.com/news/540711/inside-illuminas-plans-
to-lure-consumers-with-an-app-store-for-genomes/)

It would be rather ironic, if the Illumina stock refuses to follow the experts
and continues along the path outlined by the clowns like us (see figure at the
top of the post). You've been <del>warned</del> entertained !

