---
title: 'Our #AGBT16 Forecast - Oxford Nanopore Will Go Out of Business by 2017'
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
**Investor warning:** The following post is for entertainment purpose only, and should not be considered as financial advice of any sort. Please consult your favorite government-certified investment adviser or central banker to decide, where to invest your life savings. 
<!--more-->

\----------------------------------------------------------

Our regular readers know that our track record for making bold forecasts [is
not at all good](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/09/21/end-illumina-
era/). Please allow us to keep trying so that we can improve our skills.

Oxford nanopore appears to be on a roll. This morning, Nick Loman presented at
the AGBT conference on his work on Ebola detection. His work was recently
published in Nature.

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2016/02/Capture-4-300x54.jpg)

Elsewhere, Omics!Omics! blog wrote a few weeks back -

[When it comes to Nanopore, am I too
GAGA?](http://omicsomics.blogspot.com/2016/01/when-it-comes-to-nanopore-am-i
-too-gaga.html)

>

SCIENTIFIC DREAM INCARNATE

When I first rotated in George Church's lab in the summer of 1992, I naturally
met each person and inquired as to their project. A post-doc named Rich told
me a crazy idea of Georges that one might be able to sequence DNA using patch-
clamp techniques as the DNA passed through a pore in a membrane. Later, Rich
had a patch clamp setup -- it was on a vibration-isolating table enclosed in a
Faraday cage. It was at least the size of a desk. Even with all that, Rich
would say he could tell who was walking down the blind hallway adjacent to it,
based on the cadence from the footsteps creating noise on his instrument.

Fast forward 22 years, and we have our MinION at Starbase, ready to go. No air
table, no Faraday cage -- and I could stuff a shirt pocket with half a dozen
of them. We loaded it with a library which my colleague created, and let it
run. Then I looked a the data. Much of it was junk, and the yields that
MinKNOW promised of long reads just weren't there -- but what was there was a
single read which could be recognizable aligned to the entire 48.5 kilobases
of lambda phage. Kaboom! That's one hell of an amazing read.

We also wrote about "[Two Potentially Important Developments on
Nanopore](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2016/02/03/two-potentially-
important-developments-for-nanopore/)", and one of those developments was
considered as paradigm shift by Mick Watson ([Did you notice the paradigm
shift in DNA sequencing last week?](http://www.opiniomics.org/did-you-notice-
the-paradigm-shift-in-dna-sequencing-last-week/)).

Despite all those positives, things are not looking good for Oxford Nanopore
IMHO. Let us present our assessment for making the bold call in the title.

\-------------------------------------------------------

**1\. Amazing technology **

Nanopore fans often highlight the amazing technology that the company has
built. Historically, companies with mind-boggling technologyies do go down
from time to time, and [supersonic plane
Concorde](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Concorde) is the best example of that.
Amazing technology does not cut alone, unless a number of other factors are
supportive, as listed below.

\---------------------------------------------------------

**2\. Investment and valuation**

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2016/02/Capture-5-300x179.jpg)

Oxford Nanopore raised large amount of money in mid-July 2015, and the arrow
on the above chart shows the exact date when the public announcement was made.
The comparison with Illumina is significant, because usually the investors
make valuation decision based on important public companies. Illumina, being
the 500 pound gorilla in the sequencing space, is likely that benchmark.

Fast forward to today and you see Illumina's valuation being cut by nearly
half as of today. That means high-flying unicorns (i.e. profitless private
companies with >$1B valuation) are expected to lose even more on their
valuations.

However, not being able to raise more money is not a business-killer, unless
large investments are mismanaged.

\---------------------------------------------------------

**3\. Mismanagement**

Readers many have noticed a tweet related to 'Prometheon' in our yesterday's
blog post from AGBT.

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2016/02/Capture-1-300x55.jpg)

That appears rather innocuous, because companies sometimes have delay in
delivering products. However, once you [go through the comments at
Glassdoor](https://www.glassdoor.com/Overview/Working-at-Oxford-Nanopore-
Technologies-EI_IE744942.11,39.htm), a rather ominous picture develops. One
persons says the CTO 'announces products that don't exist and before we know
if they're possible (usually they're not and so we waste months and
millions)'. Is 'Prometheon' one such product?

**"Management don't to listen to engineers"**

> I have been working at Oxford Nanopore Technologies full-time

**Pros**

You can work on interesting projects if you're in the right team, opportunity
to move between teams, friendly staff, opportunity to go on training courses,
good private healthcare package, very commutable location.

**Cons**

The company is badly mismanaged - engineers are routinely ignored and as a
consequence people take to glassdoor to vent. The CEO thinks that the
organisation is very communicative and therefore makes zero effort to listen
to technical staff (CEO just makes a bad joke about P45s every few months to
nervous laughter). The attack on the CTO by the previous commenter isn't
completely justified, he's not as scientifically illiterate as made out.
However he does need to go - he announces products that don't exist and before
we know if they're possible (usually they're not and so we waste months and
millions), and shuts people off mid-sentence if they disagree with him. He
also posts bizarre things on the internet. The main effect of this is that
engineers feel frustrated and unable to make ourselves heard.

**Advice to Management**

Make a real effort to improve communication, with everyone, don't make them
feel like they will be demoted/fired if they disagree with you. Rein in CTO.

**Interesting tech but political**

>

**Pros**

Good pay and benefits (private healthcare). Overtime is not required, though
sometimes appreciated. Can in general be reimbursed for holidays not taken or
carry them over to the next year. Basic technology is really interesting, and
important (significant scientific and social impact). Regular bonuses and
employees receive share options.

**Cons**

I didn't like the management style very much, seemed quite political at times.
I guess having raised so much money there was a huge pressure to hire, and
large teams were formed without them really having work to do. Management
seems quite isolated from the reality of what's happening.

**Advice to Management**

Restructure, smaller more focused groups. Address issues with political
individuals.

**"This place is doomed"**

> I have been working at Oxford Nanopore Technologies full-time (More than 5
years)

**Pros**

The vision isn't bad. The people in the trenches are brilliant and wonderful.
The tech is cool.

**Cons**

The management, the management, the management, the management. The endless
politics, the backstabbing, the lack of recognition.

**Advice to Management**

Stop keeping people in the dark. Stop playing games with people's lives. Try
to have a sense of humor.

\---------------------------------------------------------

**4\. Cost**

One question that often keeps coming back is how much it costs to do the 'cool
USB sequencing' after various factors are included. For example, Jason Chin
from Pacbio asked in tweeter about the total cost of Loman's Ebola sequencing.

![Capture2](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2016/02/Capture2-2-300x52.jpg)

USB sticks being used in computers are popular not only because they are
portable, but also because they are cheap. Is that the same for nanopore
'sticks'?

This point about cost is intricately related to 2 and 3, because (i) a company
with large investments and high valuation needs to raise prices to pay for the
investment, (ii) if the company is not managed in a lean manner, that reduces
room for cutting costs.

\---------------------------------------------------------

**5\. Not so amazing technology yet**

Our point 1 was about 'amazing technology' as seen from the point of view of
the fans of the company. Their tweets made us re-evaluate various papers at
biorxiv, and we are not so enamored on this point.

For example, in our previous blog posts, readers mentioned the space as a
potentially big application for the technology. They may take a look at the
following paper from NASA, who did not manage to make good use of the
sequencer. After they did a full evaluation, they wrote -

[Nanopore Sequencing in
Microgravity](http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2015/12/10/032342)

> The ability to perform remote, in situ sequencing and diagnostics has been a
long-sought goal for point-of-care medicine and portable DNA/RNA measurements.
This technological advancement extends to missions beyond Earth as well, both
for crew health and astrobiology applications. However, most commercially
available sequencing technologies are ill-suited for space flight for a
variety of reasons, including excessive volume and mass, and insufficient
ruggedization for spaceflight. Portable and lightweight nanopore-based
sequencers, which analyze nucleic acids electrochemically, are inherently much
better suited to spaceflight, and could potentially be incorporated into
future missions with only minimal modification. As a first step toward
evaluating the performance of nanopore sequencers in a microgravity
environment, we tested the Oxford Nanopore Technologies MinIONTM in a
parabolic flight simulator to examine the effect of reduced gravity on DNA
sequencing. **The instrument successfully generated three reads, averaging
2,371 bases. However, the median current was shifted across all reads and the
error profiles changed compared with operation of the sequencer on the ground,
indicating that distinct computational methods may be needed for such data.**
We evaluated existing methods and propose two new methods; the first new
method is based on a wave-fingerprint method similar to that of the Shazam
model for matching periodicity information in music, and the second is based
on entropy signal mapping. These tools provide a unique opportunity for
nucleic acid sequencing in reduced gravity environments. Finally, we discuss
the lessons learned from the parabolic flight as they would apply to
performing DNA sequencing with the MinIONTM aboard the International Space
Station.

CTO of the company challenged their assertion in the comment section, and his
point is scientifically valid. The larger point is that NASA did not find the
technology easy to use, and it will possibly take several iterations before
they pay for it. At this point, they remain to be unconvinced customers.

> I am highly sceptical that gravity changes the operation of the chemistry
which works on a very small scale and is driven by ion flow and diffusion -
and there isn't enough data here to test that hypothesis fully yet anyway.
There are lots of other things that might indirectly affect operation of the
entire system, the simplest being that you had bad chips - but even so, given
the amount of data, at this stage i'd be sceptical that the differences you
have seen do not have simpler causes or are just statistically insignificant.

An interesting alternative might be instead, for example, take a MinION system
that is operating normally from the start so providing a baseline, drop it
from a tall building in a box, and continue to record the data. As I
understand, the vomit comet is simply freefall in an enclosed space removing
decelerating wind resistance. This drop experiment, whilst short lived, would
at least provide an internal control for the setup, chip quality, buffers,
operator etc and any changes in state from baseline 'normal' caused by the
freefall itself could be seen against that. My bet, just a bet, is that there
wouldn't be any changes to the data, in fact - Im thinking this is a helpful
test we could do. Not least as we don't have a Vomit Comet.

A valiant effort nonetheless, and my suggestion would be overcome any
operational obstacles to generating many more reads on a normal run caused by
doing the set up in low G. Use of VolTRAX instead of tip and Gilsons (and
humans) would remove the operator/liquid handling difficulties and any
variance coming from it, again isolating the core system.

Even if there was a systematic effect on the operation of the
sensing/chemistry itself, provided the overall S:N is preserved and we still
have step wise movement of the DNA under a constant applied current - it is
probably learnable and amenable to the same decoding methods used now, new
methods would not be needed.

\-----------------------------------------------------

After considering all pluses and minuses, our assessment is that this company
managed to raise money in a very positive environment and will not be able to
pull through during a global financial rout. Moreover, the hostility (based on
glassdoor) between management and rank and file employees will lead to demise
or firesale of the company in such an environment.

> Senior management, in particular the CTO, have placed company in a situation
where we are not profitable and our jobs are at risk. While employees worry
about their employment prospects some senior management park Ferraris and
Porches in the car park at the building entrance for everyone to see. * CTO
surrounds himself with yes men, demoting those who disagree with him, He is
also arrogant to the point which many find extremely off-putting and has very
limited understanding of core scientific concepts. There is not one technical
person in the company with a positive word to say about him. * It is unclear
how long we can survive unprofitable. Management share none of the finances
with staff. * Highly-political environment.

Edit.

![Capture](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2016/02/Capture-7-300x197.jpg)

