---
title: Zika Oxitech Connection Can be Explained without Resorting to 'Conspiracies'
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Zerohedge reported -
<!--more-->

![zika-virus-2](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/zika-
virus-2-300x235.jpg)

[Zika Outbreak Epicenter In Same Area Genetically-Modified Mosquitoes Released
In 2015](http://www.zerohedge.com/news/2016-01-29/zika-outbreak-epicenter-
same-area-genetically-modified-mosquitoes-released-2015)

> When examining a rapidly expanding potential pandemic, its necessary to
leave no stone unturned so possible solutions, as well as future prevention,
will be as effective as possible. In that vein, there was another significant
development in 2015.

Oxitec first unveiled its large-scale, genetically-modified mosquito farm in
Brazil in July 2012, with the goal of reducing the incidence of dengue fever,
as The Disease Daily reported. Dengue fever is spread by the same Aedes
mosquitoes which spread the Zika virus and though they cannot fly more than
400 meters, WHO stated, it may inadvertently be transported by humans from one
place to another. By July 2015, shortly after the GM mosquitoes were first
released into the wild in Juazeiro, Brazil, Oxitec proudly announced they had
successfully controlled the Aedes aegypti mosquito that spreads dengue fever,
chikungunya and zika virus, by reducing the target population by more than
90%.

Though that might sound like an astounding success and, arguably, it was there
is an alarming possibility to consider.

Nature, as one Redditor keenly pointed out, finds a way and the effort to
control dengue, zika, and other viruses, appears to have backfired
dramatically.

\------------------------------------------------------------------

A poorly trained technical writer at Discover magazine argued -

[No, GM Mosquitoes Didnt Start The Zika
Outbreak](http://blogs.discovermagazine.com/science-sushi/2016/01/31
/genetically-modified-mosquitoes-didnt-start-zika-ourbreak/#.VrVdW9LNn0s)

> A new ridiculous rumor is spreading around the internets. According to
conspiracy theorists, the recent outbreak of Zika can be blamed on the British
biotech company Oxitec, which some are saying even intentionally caused the
disease as a form of ethnic cleansing or population control. The articles all
cite a lone Redditor who proposed the connection on January 25th to the
Conspiracy subreddit. There are no biological free lunches, says one commenter
on the idea. Releasing genetically altered species into the environment could
have disastrous consequences another added. Maybe thats what some entities
want to happen?

For some reason, its been one of those months where random nonsense suddenly
hits mainstream. Here are the facts: theres no evidence whatsoever to support
this conspiracy theory, or any of the other bizarre, anti-science claims that
have popped up in the past few weeks. So lets stop all of this right here,
right now: The Earth is round, not flat (and its definitely not hollow). Last
year was the hottest year on record, and climate change is really happening
(so please just stop, Mr. Cruz). And FFS, genetically modified mosquitoes
didnt start the Zika outbreak.

\------------------------------------------------------------------

Let us try it differently.

**Observation.** A correlation between spread of zika virus and Oxitec's action has been observed. 

Correlation does not mean causation (check - ["Do not Go for a Swim after
Having an Ice Cream"](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2011/11/17/do-not-go-
for-a-swim-after-having-an-ice-cream/)). However, the correlation is still a
valid observation that needs to be explained.

The problem with Discover Magazine's argument is that instead of trying to
think about various ways to explain the correlation and ruling them out, it
decided to present its own model of why there could not be any connection
between Oxitec and Zika, and then boldly claimed theirs is the only possible
model.

How about another possibility? Let us say there are two subspecies of Aedes
aegypti mosquito - Aedes aegypti "dengue" and Aedes aegypti "zika" - spreading
dengue and zika respectively. The current scientific knowledge assigns both
diseases to one 'Aedes aegypti', but that may be a limitation of current
knowledge. It is possible that Oxitec targeted Aedes aegypti "dengue"
subspecies and wiped it out. As a result, the other mosquito fill up its
space. Will zika cases explode in such a scenario?

\-----------------------------------------------------

