---
title: Formin Is Associated with Left-Right Asymmetry in the Pond Snail and the Frog
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
This is another fascinating paper showing how little we know about the most
basic questions, including 'symmetry-breaking' during animal development.
<!--more-->

[Link](http://www.cell.com/current-biology/abstract/S0960-9822%2816%2900056-7)

> **Highlights**

Animals tend to be outwardly symmetric but internally are asymmetric

Unlike other animals, snails show inherited variation in asymmetry

We found that both snails and frogs use a common gene to define left and right

Asymmetry is probably an ancient and conserved property of cells and animals

**Summary**

While components of the pathway that establishes left-right asymmetry have
been identified in diverse animals, from vertebrates to flies, it is striking
that the genes involved in the first symmetry-breaking step remain wholly
unknown in the most obviously chiral animals, the gastropod snails.
Previously, research on snails was used to show that left-right signaling of
Nodal, downstream of symmetry breaking, may be an ancestral feature of the
Bilateria [ 1, 2 ]. Here, we report that a disabling mutation in one copy of a
tandemly duplicated, diaphanous-related formin is perfectly associated with
symmetry breaking in the pond snail. This is supported by the observation that
an anti-formin drug treatment converts dextral snail embryos to a sinistral
phenocopy, and in frogs, drug inhibition or overexpression by microinjection
of formin has a chirality-randomizing effect in early (pre-cilia) embryos.
Contrary to expectations based on existing models [ 35 ], we discovered
asymmetric gene expression in 2- and 4-cell snail embryos, preceding
morphological asymmetry. As the formin-actin filament has been shown to be
part of an asymmetry-breaking switch in vitro [ 6, 7 ], together these results
are consistent with the view that animals with diverse body plans may derive
their asymmetries from the same intracellular chiral elements [ 8 ].

