---
title: Is "Huge" Business Downturn Coming in the Sequencing Industry?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
[Note: Following post is not investment advice.]
<!--more-->

![sc2](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/sc2-300x227.png)

![sc](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/sc-300x227.png)

Illumina stock (ILMN) looks very weak. If you compare the charts of $SPX and
ILMN, you will find that ILMN did not participate in the stock market rally
over the last few weeks. One possible explanation is that people with
knowledge (aka insiders) are sensing bad business condition for the company or
the entire sector, and are taking the opportunity of the rally to sell their
stocks.

We alerted our readers about possible worldwide saturation in sequencing
capabilities in June last year (Check "[Peak Sequencing? BGI Unveils Nation-
scale Sequencer](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/06/09/peak-sequencing-
bgi-unveils-nation-scale-sequencer/)"). Incidentally, Illumina stock peaked
within a month of that post, and BGI made surprise announcement to cancel its
plan for 'nation-scale' sequencing in October ([Peak Sequencing Consequence?
BGI Delays Launch of Nation-scale
Sequencer](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/11/24/peak-sequencing-
consequence-bgi-delays-launch-of-nation-scale-sequencer/)). In another
surprising decision made around that time, BGI also [closed its UC Davis
sequencing facility](http://dnatech.genomecenter.ucdavis.edu/faqs/uc-davis-
genome-center-and-the-bgiuc-davis/).

> The BGI@UCDavis was located in the School of Medicine on the Sacramento
campus and did provide sequencing services for large scale sequencing projects
up until September 2015. This BGI facility is now closed. Since our DNA
Technologies Core operates the latest generation of sequencers
(HiSeq3000/4000), which offers a 7 times increased throughput compared to the
previous generation, our Core is now taking on also large sequencing projects.
The DNA Technologies Core is offering all the services previously provided by
the BGI@UCDavis. In addition we offer many specialized services and support
for custom sequencing projects.

Also see - ["Major UC Davis genetics partnership with Chinese firm
ends"](http://www.sacbee.com/news/business/article44277492.html)

BGI-UC Davis collaboration was initially touted in 2013 as 'huge leap forward'
([Huge Leap Forward in Genome Sequencing Research Capabilities at UC
Davis](http://info.biotech-calendar.com/bid/92831/Huge-Leap-Forward-in-Genome-
Sequencing-Research-Capabilities-at-UC-Davis)). Does that mean the closure of
the same facility within two years was a 'huge leap backward', or was it
rather a consequence of less demand than supply for sequencing machines? The
2013 press release (see below) suggests the later. Maybe the world needs less
'huge' 'major' 'drama' going forward :)

> An historic collaboration between the University of California Davis and
China's BGI, the worlds largest genomics organization, has **dramatically
increased the University's genome sequencing capabilities** and promises to
open up altogether new research opportunities in the life sciences community
with genomic studies of plants, animals, humans and microbes. The new joint
endeavor is called BGI@UC Davis and will benefit both UCD and China's first
citizen-managed, non-profit research institution.

The above observations are consistent with our forecast made a month back
("[Our #AGBT16 Forecast Oxford Nanopore Will Go Out of Business by
2017](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2016/02/13/our-agbt16-forecast-oxford-
nanopore-will-go-out-of-business-by-2017/)").

