---
title: Someone Asked Francis Collins about the Retraction Boom. Here is What he Did
  not Say.
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
<!--more-->

[The utterly dishonest NIH head Francis
Collins](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/01/22/francis-collins-admits-
nih-under-him-has-been-failing/) participated in a [reddit AMA](https://www.re
ddit.com/r/science/comments/4gcwwy/science_ama_series_i_am_francis_collins_cur
rent/?) three days back. One reader asked -

> Hi Dr. Collins. Due to the rising number of retracted papers and errata in
the biomedical sciences and the lack of reproducibility of many key study
results, it seems like the scientific community needs better quality control
than our current peer review system provides. Does the NIH have any
initiatives being developed to promote more reproducible science and better
communication of science?

**What Collins did not say:**

One effective way to stop retractions is to promote the senior author to be
NIH director. Unfortunately, there are not too many slots left.

\--------------------------------------------

For reference (NY Times 1996) -

[Falsified Data Found in Gene Studies](http://www.nytimes.com/1996/10/30/us
/falsified-data-found-in-gene-studies.html)

> Dr. Francis S. Collins, the head of the Government's project to map all
human genes, said yesterday that he was retracting five research papers on
leukemia in leading scientific journals because a junior colleague had
fabricated data.

The flawed papers involved laboratory research on the role of a defective gene
in producing acute leukemia. The research did not involve patients or
treatment of the disease, nor was it directly related to the gene-mapping
project.

Upon learning of the problem in mid-August, Dr. Collins said in an interview,
he ''thought it was an isolated instance whereby a trainee in my laboratory
manipulated the data.'' But two weeks later, after examining the colleague's
laboratory notebooks and testing material in the freezer, he said, ''the
significance and the scope of the fabrication in this circumstance, of which I
had not the slightest idea, began to be very apparent.''

Collins essentially blamed 'junior author' for even the two-author papers and
took no responsibility at all.

