---
title: Is this the Future of Cloud-connected Hospitals Delivering 'Precision Medicine'?
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
The computer system of Hollywood Presbyterian Medical Center in Los Angeles
has been hijacked by one or more hackers, who are asking for $3.6M ransom to
restore access.
<!--more-->

[Hollywood hospital hit by ransomware attack, hackers demand
$3.6M](http://www.foxnews.com/tech/2016/02/16/hollywood-hospital-hit-by-
ransomware-attack-hackers-demand-3-6m.html?intcmp=hpbt3)

> Ransomware is always going to present a major headache for any victim, but
when a hospital is at the center of an attack, the matter suddenly appears
more threatening, with the stakes potentially a whole lot higher.

Take the Hollywood Presbyterian Medical Center in Los Angeles. Its computer
systems have been offline for more than a week following a ransomware attack,
with hackers reportedly demanding a $3.6 million payment to restore access,
CSO reported Monday.

Staff are understandably having a hard time coping, with procedures such as CT
scans unable to be carried out. In some cases, patients are being ferried to
nearby medical facilities for treatment.

The ongoing incident also means hospital workers are unable to gain access to
important documents, patient data, and emails. Instead, staff have had to step
back in time, firing up fax machines and making more use of pens and paper to
keep track of work at the facility.

The hospital has confirmed the attack, and says that so far it has no evidence
to suggest patients' medical records have been accessed by the hackers, the
BBC reported.

The computing system of the hospital is likely on-premise and therefore more
secure than the coming world of cloud-powered 'precision medicine'. Sadly, a
recent paper from ENCODE leader Mike Snyder shows that security issue is not
being taken seriously. The paper talks a lot about how to stay on the right
side of various security regulations and very little about how to actually
keep the data and exchanges secure. We expected to see extensive discussions
on new security and privacy threats, given that the existing regulations were
developed for pre-cloud era, but did not find any. In fact, occasional gripes
in the paper about how the existing regulations create obstacles for
researchers ('We realize that the above recommendation poses challenge for the
researcher in the scenario where the researcher leaves the institute but
retains access to data.') suggests that these people are not at all concerned
about security issues, and would feel happy to outsource that obligation to
some outside central planning agency (HIPAA, PHI, FISMA, FedRAMP) etc.

[Practical Guidelines for Secure Cloud Computing for Genomic
Data](http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2015/12/20/034876.full-text.pdf+html)

> Understanding Cloud security for genomics data is challenging but a critical
need. It is our observation that security requirements are often inconsistent
not only across datasets but also between on-premise solutions and Cloud for
the same dataset. We attempt to summarize these security requirements across a
wide range of regulatory bodies from government and private sources. While we
expect the implementation to be different between Clouds and evolution in
implementation methodology in time, we expect these guidelines to be
applicable in foreseeable future. We also note that security does not
necessary provide privacy and significant effort is needed to address privacy
for a research centric platform.

