---
title: CRISPR Fight and the Corrosive Role of Bayh-Dole Act in Damaging Basic Science
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Readers wanted us to comment on the ongoing dogfight related to CRISPR
patents. Only thing we can say is that patents related to publicly funded
research should be placed in the public domain, because otherwise the patent
fight damages basic research at several levels.
<!--more-->

The contemporary systems for patents and basic research have different
origins. The patent system was medieval and came from the monopoly rights
granted by the kings in the Anglo-countries. [Such monopolies were messy
throughout their entire
history](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_patent_law), and people, who
support them, are enamored with the sanitized versions of events.

> This power was used to raise money for the Crown, and was widely abused, as
the Crown granted patents in respect of all sorts of common goods (salt, for
example). Consequently, the Court began to limit the circumstances in which
they could be granted. After public outcry, James I of England was forced to
revoke all existing monopolies and declare that they were only to be used for
"projects of new invention". This was incorporated into the Statute of
Monopolies in which Parliament restricted the Crown's power explicitly so that
the King could only issue letters patent to the inventors or introducers of
original inventions for a fixed number of years.

Also,

> Towards the end of the 18th century, and influenced by the philosophy of
John Locke, the granting of patents began to be viewed as a form of
intellectual property right, rather than simply the obtaining of economic
privilege. A negative aspect of the patent law also emerged in this period -
the abuse of patent privilege to monopolise the market and prevent improvement
from other inventors. A notable example of this was the behaviour of Boulton &
Watt in hounding their competitors such as Richard Trevithick through the
courts, and preventing their improvements to the steam engine from being
realised until their patent expired.

The contemporary system of basic research and academic credits had its origin
in the [continental Europe during the Age of
Enlightenment](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Romanticism). Many enlightenment
concepts such as [giving credits to abstract
ideas](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plagiarism) came from that period.

Prior to the world wars, German companies produced many high quality patents,
and those patents were extensively looted by USA under the guidance of
Vannevar Bush. Vannevar Bush also guided the building of US science following
the model of pre-war Germany, with help from the immigrant Europeans moving to
USA from Europe. Only element German system did not have was patents in
academic institutions, and USA managed to screw up that part in its unique
way.

At first, the federal government gave large amounts of free money to the
universities, but kept all patents. Then came the Bayh-Dole act of 1980
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bayh%E2%80%93Dole_Act), where federal

government gave full rights of patents for research done through public money
to the academic institutions and allowed to commercialize them to fund
'academic' research.

In the long run, those two systems of supporting academics (pre-enlightentment
patent monopoly and post-enlightenment educational approach) are incompatible.
The attitude of basic science in giving credit and respect to the earliest
contributors cannot work together with an 'one person attempts to own
everything' system.

> Under the influence of the ascendant economic philosophy of free trade
economics in England, the patent law began to be criticised in the 1850s as
obstructing research and benefiting the few at the expense of public good.[24]

......

_[Patents] projected an artificial idol of the single inventor, radically
denigrated the role of the intellectual commons, and blocked a path to this
commons for other citizens citizens who were all, on this account, potential
inventors too. [...] Patentees were the equivalent of squatters on public land
or better, of uncouth market traders who planted their barrows in the middle
of the highway and barred the way of the people._

Similar debates took place during that time in other European countries such
as France, Prussia, Switzerland and the Netherlands.[28] Based on the
criticism of patents as state-granted monopolies inconsistent with free trade,
the Netherlands abolished patents in 1869 (having established them in 1817),
and did not reintroduce them until 1912.[29] In Switzerland, criticism of
patents delayed the introduction of patent laws until 1907.[28][29]

\-----------------------------------------------

Readers may enjoy the following article and related comments from 'In the
Pipeline' blog.

[Why This CRISPR Article, and Why Now?

Various comments -

1\.

> Im honestly confused why is Eric Landers article a terrible conflict of
interest, but Jennifer Doudnas writing on the history of CRISPR (thinking of
that Nature piece a few weeks ago) is just fine? Her conflict is much more
direct than Landers, and her piece certainly doesnt seem any more balanced.

2\.

> Doudna published a Comment in Nature last month. She should have seen this
coming. I like Landers Perspective because at least he gave us a map of all
those people working on CRISPR before 2012.

Funny how scientists fight over money and reputation.

3\.

> Set aside all the bitterness, I think this paper gave credit where it is
due, in particular to those scientists from not-well-known institutes and non-
English speaking countries.

4\.

> The sad story about this paper is that not many are talking about the early
and real pioneers of the CRISPR field and everyone is obsessed about Doudna
vs. Zhang. If you read this and other CRISPR papers, neither Doudna nor Zhang
contributed to the identification of the three essential components of the
CRISPR-Cas9 system.

Doudna even went on to claim that she invented CRISPR-Cas9 in her TED talk
even though her contribution is to convert a 3-component system to a
2-component systeman engineering feat at best. Doudna & Zhang are more like
Steve Jobs while the early pioneers are more like Wozniak and others.

I really hope the Nobel committee recognizes the early contributorsthese
scientists were given a hard time by the scientific community (their papers
were rejected!) and the scientist are again doing a disservice by willfully
ignoring early pioneers and obsessing about the engineering feats of Doudna
and Zhang.

