---
title: War of Standards - XML vs JSON
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
By mid-90s, software companies started to think about ways to make sure
millions of would be internet-connected devices talk to each other. XML, a
generalized version of highly popular HTML, was one possible option. In fact,
for many years it was the only option. XML standards were designed in mid-90s
by a committee of eleven well-respected programmers and had widespread backing
from companies.
<!--more-->

> XML was compiled by a working group of eleven members,[28] supported by a
(roughly) 150-member Interest Group. Technical debate took place on the
Interest Group mailing list and issues were resolved by consensus or, when
that failed, majority vote of the Working Group. A record of design decisions
and their rationales was compiled by Michael Sperberg-McQueen on December 4,
1997.[29] James Clark served as Technical Lead of the Working Group, notably
contributing the empty-element "" syntax and the name "XML". Other names that
had been put forward for consideration included "MAGMA" (Minimal Architecture
for Generalized Markup Applications), "SLIM" (Structured Language for Internet
Markup) and "MGML" (Minimal Generalized Markup Language). The co-editors of
the specification were originally Tim Bray and Michael Sperberg-McQueen.
Halfway through the project Bray accepted a consulting engagement with
Netscape, provoking vociferous protests from Microsoft. Bray was temporarily
asked to resign the editorship. This led to intense dispute in the Working
Group, eventually solved by the appointment of Microsoft's Jean Paoli as a
third co-editor.

Pit against this large army of people and companies was one man, Douglas
Crockford. Crockford ran a small company and JSON, his idea for communication
method was several years behind what the XML group developed.

> Douglas Crockford was the first to specify and popularize the JSON
format.[3] The acronym was coined at State Software, a company co-founded by
Crockford, Chip Morningstar and Robert F. Napiltonia in April 2001 and funded
by Tesla Ventures. The co-founders agreed to build a system that used standard
browser capabilities and provided an abstraction layer for Web developers to
create stateful Web applications that had a persistent duplex connection to a
Web server by holding two HTTP connections open and recycling them before
standard browser time-outs if no further data were exchanged. The idea for the
State Application Framework was developed by Morningstar at State
Software.[4][5] JSON was used in a project at Communities.com for Cartoon
Network, which used a plug-in with a proprietary messaging format to
manipulate DHTML elements (this system is also owned by 3DO).

Who won this asymmetric war? We will cover that tomorrow :)

