---
title: Epigenetics Debacle - Do You Feel Sad for Sid Mukherjee?
tags:
- epigenetics
- book
categories:
- blog
---
Over the weekend, [Pulitzer Prize winning writer Sid
Mukherjee](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Siddhartha_Mukherjee) published an
article '[Same but Different - How epigenetics can blur the line between
nature and nurture](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Siddhartha_Mukherjee)' in
the New Yorker magazine.
<!--more-->

![fbb730f4](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2016/05/fbb730f4-150x150.jpg)

> On October 6, 1942, my mother was born twice in Delhi. Bulu, her identical
twin, came first, placid and beautiful. My mother, Tulu, emerged several
minutes later, squirming and squalling. The midwife must have known enough
about infants to recognize that the beautiful are often the damned: the quiet
twin, on the edge of listlessness, was severely undernourished and had to be
swaddled in blankets and revived.

The article received widespread criticism for turning black into white, which
happens to be a common practice in the epigenetics field. For a detailed
summary of criticisms by various scientists, readers may check the following
two blog posts of evolutionary biologist Jerry Coyne. A couple of examples are
included from many.

[The New Yorker screws up big time with science: researchers criticize the
Mukherjee piece on
epigenetics](https://whyevolutionistrue.wordpress.com/2016/05/05/the-new-
yorker-screws-up-big-time-with-science-researchers-criticize-the-mukherjee-
piece-on-epigenetics/)

[Researchers criticize the Mukherjee piece on epigenetics: Part
2](https://whyevolutionistrue.wordpress.com/2016/05/06/researchers-criticize-
the-mukherjee-piece-on-epigenetics-part-2/)

> **Wally Gilbert**, Nobel Laureate, biochemist and molecular biologist,
Harvard University (retired).

The New Yorker article is so wildly wrong that it defies rational analysis.
Too much of the epigenetic discussion is wishful thinking seeking Lamarckian
effects, and ignoring the role of sequence specific regulatory proteins and
genes. (as well as sequence specific RNA molecules).

********* 

**Sidney Altman**, Sterling Professor of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology and Chemistry at Yale University, Nobel Laureate: 

I am not aware that there is such a thing as an epigenetic code. It is
unfortunate to inflict this article, without proper scientific review, on the
audience of The New Yorker.

\-----------------------------------------

Readers may note that the real criticism should be directed to NHGRI with its
funding of unscientific 'big science' projects on epigenetics and epigenomic
markers, and unscrupulous <del>scientists</del> technicians like Eric Lander,
Manolis Kellis, Eric Green and several others, who benefit from this largess.
In fact, many criticisms of Sid Mukherjee's article are similar to what we had
been writing over the years regarding various epigenome papers and projects.

In "[The Conspiracy of Epigenome?](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/02/20
/the-conspiracy-of-epigenome/)", we wrote -

> We would have had to scratch our heads less, if Lander used conspiracy of
epigenome instead. Nothing managed to derail this expensive boondoggle over
the last four years, including powerful critics of the scientific principle
behind it, fraud allegation against the leader, public humiliation of its
sister project ENCODE, NIH cost-cutting and protest of the scientists, and so
on. What appears even more puzzling is that despite all those prior events,
the leaders of the epigenome project ended up making the same mistakes as
ENCODE. Dont these clowns learn anything?

\-----------------------------------------

In [NHGRIs Epigenetics Investments Starting to Pay
Off](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/10/08/nhgris-epigenetics-
investments-starting-to-pay-off/), we highlighted several other epigenetics-
related bogus <del>discoveries</del> press-releases from NIH-funded research.

\-----------------------------------------

In [Epigenetics in Stem Cells Is It a Significant Paradigm Shift in
Biology?](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2013/04/30/epigenetics-in-stem-
cells-is-it-a-significant-paradigm-shift-in-biology/), we wrote -

> Nobody gets more angry about reference to epiginetics than famous biologist
Mark Ptashne. The reason is simple. Epigenetics is not as harmless as paradigm
shift. In addition to using bad word, it also introduces bad scientific
concepts as explained by Dr. Ptashne.

Faddish Stuff: Epigenetics and the Inheritance of Acquired Characteristics

...

Ptashnes battle against epigenetics is not new. Few years back, he, Oliver
Hobert and Eric Davidson rightly questioned about the wisdom of backing large
epigenome projects.

\-----------------------------------------

In [Epigenetics Explained, in the Context of Descendants of Holocaust and
Slavery Victims](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2014/07/23/epigenetics-
explained-in-the-context-of-descendants-of-holocaust-and-slavery-victims/), we
explained -

> The word epigenetics was introduced by biologist C. H. Waddington in 1940s
to explain how the cells maintained their states during development.

For example, the muscle cells, once differentiated, continue to divide into
muscle cells and the same is true for other kinds of cells, even though they
all start from one universal mother cell and carry the same chromosomes after
division. How does a cell get programmed into being a muscle cell or neuronal
cell? Waddington speculated that there must be some epigenetic effect, because
all cells continue to have the same chromosomes and therefore the same set of
genes.

Please note that in 1942, there was no DNA sequence and Waddington was trying
to explain things in abstract terms. In the following 60+ years, Waddingtons
question was fully answered by geneticists and developmental biologists. It is
found that the cells remember their states (muscle or neuron or kidney, etc.)
through the actions of a set of genes called transcription factors acting on
other genes through binding sites on the chromosomes. Both Professor Ptashne
and Professor Davidsons labs did extensive research to elucidate the
mechanisms, and Waddingtons epigenetics was explained through their work.

\------------------------------------------------

**Eric Davidson's book**

One major criticism of Mukherjee's article is on his claim that Yamanaka's
stem cell work was a proof of 'epigenetic regulation', when it was the exact
opposite. Readers interested in learning about the real science behind how
genomes and Yamanaka's work connect together should start with Eric Davidson's
book previously discussed in our blog -

[A Must Read Book, If You Like to Understand
Genomes](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/05/01/a-must-read-book-if-you-
like-to-understand-genomes/)

\------------------------------------------------

Lastly, maybe it is time for Sid Mukherjee to pick up a real cause that would
save other writers like him from future embarrassment.

[Lets Discuss Is it Time to Shut Down
NHGRI?](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2015/01/09/lets-discuss-is-it-time-
to-shut-down-nhgri/)

