---
title: UC Berkeley is Running out of Money. Here is What They Plan to Do
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Despite having a huge technology boom in their backyard, the finances of UC
Berkeley are diving into deep red.
<!--more-->

The Chronicle of Higher Education reports in "[Acknowledging New Normal,
Berkeley Announces Broad Plan to Shore Up
Finances](http://chronicle.com/blogs/ticker/acknowledging-new-normal-berkeley-
announces-broad-plan-to-shore-up-finances/108528)" -

> Citing a new normal of diminished state funding, the University of
California at Berkeley is launching a strategic-planning process aimed at
shoring up its finances. In a message to the campus on Wednesday morning, the
universitys chancellor, Nicholas B. Dirks, laid out several broad areas for
change the university will consider.

Specifics about the strategic-planning process are scarce. What is clear,
however, is the universitys harsh financial outlook. According to a financial
summary provided by a university spokesman, Berkeley faces a $150-million
deficit for the current fiscal year, representing 6 percent of its operating
budget.

Here are the expected plans from the above article. We also provide plain-
English interpretation of MBA-speak -

**Proposal 1. Raising revenue through the use of the universitys brand, land, and other assets.**

In plain English, (i) raise tuition on suckers, (ii) take loans on the
buildings, (iii) lease some of the UC land to private companies. Among those,
the first option is possibly out, given that-

[UC Berkeley and Oakland high school students protest tuition hikes, other
higher education issues](http://www.dailycal.org/2015/03/04/uc-berkeley-
oakland-high-school-students-protest-tuition-hikes-higher-education-issues/)

![96hours_ahart-900x580](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2016/02/96hours_ahart-900x580-300x193.jpg)

> Students from both UC Berkeley and Oakland Technical High School organized
two demonstrations on campus Wednesday one to protest proposed tuition hikes
and the other to advocate admitting more Oakland public school students to UC
Berkeley.

The UC Berkeley students demonstration called a funeral for public education
was a part of the 96 Hours of Action, a series of protests throughout UC
campuses against a tuition hike policy passed in November. The protesters
carried a cardboard coffin representing the death of Californias public
education system. They began on Sproul Plaza, walked to California Hall and
then marched back to Telegraph Avenue and Bancroft Way, blocking traffic for a
short period of time.

\---------------------------------

**Proposal 2. The realignment of some of the universitys academic parts by bolstering some units and combining others to capture intellectual synergies.**

"Realignment" is code-word for "downsizing", which itself is a code-word for
getting rid of employees. Given that UCs cannot fire tenured professors yet,
this step will lead to combining departments and cutting on everything else.
This is gonna be fun.

\---------------------------------

**Proposal 3. Better supporting teaching and research while also redesigning many of our work processes in order to achieve greater efficiency.**

This is MBA speak with no additional action beyond proposal 2. Maybe they will
replace classroom lectures with videos from Coursera and TAs with robots from
Google :). "Efficiency" always means replacing humans with "smart" machines.

\-------------------------------------------------------------------------

We should point out that none of those are going to work. What is UC
Berkeley's real problem? It is the Federal Reserves cutting interest rate to
0%, and bleeding all kinds of savings funds. Let me explain.

Suppose an organization needs to hire a tenured professor. That means the
organization needs to make sure it can provide steady salary for the person
for many years.

Think about it this way. Suppose you run a company, and want to hire an
employee with a six-month contract of $10,000/month. That means your company
needs to secure $60K of cash flow to make sure the employee contract is not
violated. Historically, that cash flow came either from continuing business or
interests on savings made by the business. For charitable institutions, the
second option historically played big role.

For example, if the company had $1M in bank earning 6%, it could use the
earned interest to pay the employee's salary without worrying about business
prospects. Many organizations like universities and charitable non-profits had
substantial savings, and they used the interest to pay for employees in
perpetuity. Even the Nobel Foundation uses the same model for paying the prize
in perpetuity. This kind of 'paying perpetually from interest' calculations
were routine everywhere. For example, I remember, when our family made a small
donation for a college award several years back, the head of the college did
the same interest rate calculation to explain how much the donation needed to
be for the award amount.

Zero percent interest rate throws a monkey wrench into the entire model and
especially damages long-term hiring. US treasury [10 year bond produces 1.7%
interest](http://stockcharts.com/h-sc/ui?s=%24tyx) at present. Therefore, to
permanently hire someone with the salary of $200K/year from the interest, an
organization needs to keep $6M in 10 year treasury bonds, whereas the
requirement was only one third of that a few years back. So, UC Berkeley has
to either dramatically increase its savings fund with each drop in interest
rate, or cut down on ambitions of hiring tenured professors. Most universities
are going for the second option.

Are we glad that these universities are suffering? Absolutely, given that this
dumb economic model of lowering interest rate to support banks came from none
other than the academics from various top US universities.

![download](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/wp-
content/uploads/2016/02/download.jpg)

Finally, if you think 0% interest rate is the end of this nonsense, you may be
glad to know that the academics are talking about deep negative interest rates
(check - [JPM's Striking Forecast: ECB Could Cut Rates To -4.5%; BOJ To
-3.45%; Fed To -1.3%](http://www.zerohedge.com/news/2016-02-10/jpms-striking-
forecast-ecb-could-cut-rates-45-boj-345-fed-13)). God bless UC Berkeley, when
that happens.

The above money problems are another reason UC Berkeley is going for all-or-
nothing CRISPR-cas9 court battle with Harvard/MIT/Broad. Readers may check
"[CRISPR Fight and the Corrosive Role of Bayh-Dole Act in Damaging Basic
Science](http://www.homolog.us/blogs/blog/2016/01/26/crispr-fight-and-the-
corrosive-role-of-bayh-dole-act-in-damaging-basic-science/)".

