---
title: Job Opening - Computational Biologist&#47;Bioinformatics Scientist
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Hello all,
<!--more-->

Jill Wegrzyn, one of our readers, has two job openings at the Institute for
Systems Genomics. The job description is posted below, and please apply [at
this link](https://hcmprodweb.psoft.uconn.edu/psp/HRPRCGA/EMPLOYEE/HRMS/c/HRS_
HRAM.HRS_CE.GBL?Page=HRS_CE_JOB_DTL&Action=A&JobOpeningId=2016089&SiteId=1&Pos
tingSeq=1).

\-----------------------------------------

Job Title: Computational Biologist/Bioinformatics Scientist (Academic
Assistant 2 or 3)

Job ID: 2016089

Location: Storrs Campus, Storrs, CT

**POSITION SUMMARY**

The University of Connecticuts Institute for Systems Genomics is looking for
two Computational Biologists/Bioinformatics Scientists to support faculty,
researchers, and graduate students in the development and application of
analytical approaches to studying genomic data. Within the ISG
(isg.uconn.edu), the Computational Biology Core and Center for Genome
Innovation work synergistically to facilitate successful genomics projects
across a broad range of disciplines represented by the diverse faculty
research interests at UConn. We are seeking applications from dynamic,
motivated individuals who will play a key role in solidifying the recently
established Institute for Systems Genomics as a world leader in genomics.
Successful candidates will be instrumental in the implementation of commonly
used and novel bioinformatics workflows, supporting members of the UConn
community in developing and applying computational pipelines to analyze
genomic data including RNAseq, ChIP-seq, WGS, RAD-seq, and microbial data. The
candidate will also evaluate new sequencing and software technologies as they
emerge. The successful applicant will support investigators who are
researching a broad range of biological systems (model and non-model plant,
animal, and microbial species) as they design their experiments and develop
analysis workflows, particularly those that involve next-generation sequencing
data.

**DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES**

The successful candidate will:

\- develop, enhance, and maintain current and new bioinformatics pipelines on
a HPC cluster servicing multiple campuses

\- support research projects as needed, including: managing large amounts of
data, monitoring/running pipelines, project tracking and data management

\- provide consultation to faculty, researchers, and graduate students on the
use of specific computing tools for solving a variety of biological questions

\- constantly assess emerging technologies and analysis applications for
integration into existing workflows

\- interface with biologists and computer scientists and maintain web and
tutorial resources

\- offer group training workshops on genomics applications

She/he will have excellent verbal and written communication skills to
facilitate the dissemination of results through presentations, reports, and
scientific publications. She/he will evaluate emerging software tools for
possible integration into existing (and new) analysis pipelines. She/he will
continually assess data presentation, analysis and submission best practices.

**MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS**

M.S. or Ph.D. in bioinformatics, genome sciences, computational biology, or
related area. Candidates holding a Masters degree will have least two years of
professional experience supporting genomics-based bioinformatics activities.
All applicants will have direct experience or equivalent skills to design
experiments and analyze data from studies focused on: RNA-Seq, analyses of
other diverse types of eukaryotic genome-scale datasets, metagenomics, and
variant detection. Expertise in eukaryotic systems is required. Proficiency in
one or more scripting language (e.g., Perl, Python, etc.) as well as fluency
in Unix/Linux and comfort in high performance computing environments is
essential. Excellent project management and organization skills required.

**PREFERRED QUALIFICATIONS**

Solid foundation in statistics and software development; Expertise in
R/Bioconductor; Expertise with additional technologies recommended, including
Chip-Seq, RAD-Seq, genome assembly, and phylogenetics. Expertise in both
eukaryotic and prokaryotic systems is preferred.

**APPOINTMENT TERMS**

The appointment is an Academic Assistant position with an annual 11-month
appointment. Salary will be commensurate with qualifications.

**TO APPLY**

Please follow [the link provided](https://hcmprodweb.psoft.uconn.edu/psp/HRPRC
GA/EMPLOYEE/HRMS/c/HRS_HRAM.HRS_CE.GBL?Page=HRS_CE_JOB_DTL&Action=A&JobOpening
Id=2016089&SiteId=1&PostingSeq=1) for more information on how to apply for
this position.

All applications must be received by close of business, February 1, 2016.
(Search # 2016089)

